



SCHOOL-LIFE AT WINCHESTER COLLEGE




[Illustration: A “HOT” AT FOOT BALL

THE COMMONERS HAVE RED AND THE COLLEGE BOYS BLUE JERSEYS.]




                               SCHOOL-LIFE
                                    AT
                           WINCHESTER COLLEGE;
                                   OR,
                 The Reminiscences of a Winchester Junior
                      UNDER THE OLD RÉGIME, 1835-40.

             _WITH A GLOSSARY OF WORDS, PHRASES, AND CUSTOMS,
                     PECULIAR TO WINCHESTER COLLEGE._

                      BY ROBERT BLACHFORD MANSFIELD,
                                AUTHOR OF
  “THE LOG OF THE WATER-LILY,” “THE WATER-LILY ON THE DANUBE,” ETC. ETC.

                             _THIRD EDITION._

                              [Illustration]

                                 LONDON:
                        DAVID NUTT, 270-71 STRAND.
                        P. & G. WELLS, WINCHESTER.
                                  1893.




PREFACE TO THIRD EDITION.


A.D. 1893 being the quincentennial anniversary of our glorious
foundation, an enterprising publisher has undertaken to bring out a third
edition of this sketch of the life of a Winchester Junior in the dark
ages of 1835-40. Thirty years have elapsed since the book was originally
written, twenty since the second edition was brought out, and fifty-seven
since I first became a Wykehamist.

No one is more aware than myself how entirely devoid of literary merit is
this little book; but as it is a true and faithful account of the state
of the school under a system that has long been superseded, any interest
that it may have must increase from year to year, as the times of which
it treats become more distant, and the manners and customs which it
depicts present a greater contrast to those of the present day. Except in
the last chapter, which I have rewritten, there is but little difference
between this and the previous editions, firstly because I have nothing
to add or alter in my record, and secondly, because the work being
stereotyped, considerable expense would have been incurred by altering
all those passages which, written in 1862, allude to the then existence
of Dr. Moberly, the state of Meads, and Antechapel at that date, &c.,
&c., which the reader can correct for himself, but which do not in any
way affect the object of the work, viz., the economy of the school in
1835-40.

The representation of “a Hot” by Mr. Holmes gives an excellent idea of
that peculiar feature of the game of football as played at Winchester at
the date of which I write. The other pictures by Mr. Garland sufficiently
well represent the architectural features of the College, but justice is
scarcely done to the figures of the boys, who did not go through their
labours and amusements in such rigid style as might be inferred from
their figures and attitudes as here represented. The cuts in the Glossary
would also have been more effective if the artist (not Mr. Garland) had
ever seen a Winchester scholar in his peculiar costume.

The sweeping changes that commenced during my school-days were mainly
owing to the initiative of Charles Wordsworth, the late lamented Bishop
of St. Andrews, as distinguished at Oxford for his scholarship and as
a theologian as he was for his supreme excellence in cricket, rowing,
tennis, skating, and all athletic exercises. He had been appointed to
the office of Second Master one half year before I came as a boy, and,
with the willing assistance of the beloved Warden, Barter, and the
Head-Master, speedily began to make many much-needed changes in the
arrangements, which have made Winchester equal, if not superior, to any
other public school as regards the comfort and wellbeing of the boys,
and worthy of its glorious reputation for five hundred years.

I take this opportunity of expressing my great gratification at
the success of the book, and to express my thanks to my numerous
correspondents for their flattering letters. Wykehamists of every
standing have expressed their interest in this account of the manners and
customs of the School in times past, and those of my own have testified
to its accuracy. From India and America I have received most interesting
letters from old school-fellows, who had discovered from internal
evidence the personality of the writer. In one quarter alone have I met
with adverse criticism. I was accused (shortly after the publication of
the first edition) by “The Wykehamist” (a monthly publication, edited by
the boys at Winchester) of having been actuated by a feeling of ill-will
towards the School, and of untruth. How such an idea as the former could
have been gathered from the book I am at a loss to conceive, and when
it was first published the only merit that I knew it possessed was
its truth. And now I have the best public testimony to my veracity;—a
cotemporary, Mr. Gould Adams, who, in the preface to his charming book
“Wykehamica” (a work which should be one of “the hundred books” possessed
by every Wykehamist), states that he has been indebted for some of the
materials for his work to “my very truthful picture of the Winchester of
my day.”

The Bishop of St. Andrews, who kindly allowed me to use his engravings
of the “Trusty Servant,” and of the large tablet at the west end of
school with the inscription “_Aut disce_,” &c.; Mr. Mackenzie Walcot,
who permitted me to use the cut of the old Commoners Buildings that
appeared in his work on Winchester College, and my cousin, Mr. Elliot
Blackstone, of New College and the British Museum, who greatly assisted
me in bringing out the first edition, when I was abroad, have all passed
away. But I must again (for the third time) give vent to my feelings
of gratitude to the Rev. H. Moberly for answering the many questions I
troubled him with, and to my cousin, the Rev. Algernon Simeon, for his
valuable assistance in compiling the slang glossary, and to Mr. Wrench
for the very great assistance he has rendered me in supplying me with
information as to the alterations in the manners and customs of the
School, which I have embodied in the last chapter.




CONTENTS.


                                                                      PAGE

                               CHAPTER I.

    INTRODUCTION,                                                       17

                               CHAPTER II.

                OF THE LOCUS IN QUO AND DRAMATIS PERSONÆ.

    Plan of College Buildings—Dons—College
    Præfects—Candlekeepers—Dress—Choristers—Commoner
    Buildings—Præfects—Coursekeeper,                                    25

                              CHAPTER III.

                   TREATS OF SOME MANNERS AND CUSTOMS.

    A Fag’s Duties—His Respect for Præfects—Præfects’
    Responsibilities—Code of Honour—Lying Scouted—Exceptional
    Anecdote—Certain Things considered Common
    Property—Slang—Nicknames of Officials and Under-Porter—Whole
    Holidays—Remedies—Half Holidays—Sundays—Hills,                      37

                               CHAPTER IV.

                   THE JUNIOR’S START IN COLLEGE LIFE.

    πεμπε—Tin Gloves—Test of Founder’s Kin—Tutor and Pupil—The Fag
    “in Course,”                                                        53

                               CHAPTER V.

                         THE JUNIOR IN CHAMBERS.

    Choosing Chambers—Furniture of Chambers—Junior’s
    Duties—Toy-time—Mess—Sound Sleepers—Sitting up—The
    Scheme—Toefitying—Spree Mess—Theatricals,                           58

                               CHAPTER VI.

                           THE JUNIOR IN HALL.

    Rush for Trenchers, &c.—Description of Hall—Toasting and
    Cooking—Receipt for Fried Potatoes—Tea—Luncheon—Conning for
    Bands—Beever Time—Dinner—Dispars—Fagging in Hall—Kitchen,           77

                              CHAPTER VII.

                          THE JUNIOR IN CHAPEL.

    The Late Warden—The Antechapel—The Crimean Memorial—The New
    Tower—Hours of Service—The Oath—Cloisters,                          91

                              CHAPTER VIII.

                          THE JUNIOR IN SCHOOL.

    Description of School—Scobs—Officers—Division of Classes—Prizes
    and Medals—Long and Short Half—Easter Time—Commoners’
    Speaking—Cloisters—Latin Composition—Flogging—Scraping and
    Shirking Out—Latin Verses—Pealing,                                 100

                               CHAPTER IX.

                    THE JUNIOR ON A LOCKBACK HOLIDAY.

    Fagging Choristers—Crutch—Currell—Concerts—Fighting—How to
    Catch the Measles—“Books Chambers,”                                119

                               CHAPTER X.

                          THE JUNIOR IN MEADS.

    “Watching out”—Cricket Reminiscences—Lord’s
    Matches—Turf—Football—Six and Six—Twenty-two and Twenty-two—SS
    and Trees—Fines—Sick-House—Gooseberry Fool—“Going
    Continent”—Long Meads—Enlargement of Meads,                        128

                               CHAPTER XI.

                          THE JUNIOR ON HILLS.

    On—Mizmaze—The Badger—Swimming Lessons—Practical Jokes—Trial
    for Assault—Town and Gown Row,                                     149

                              CHAPTER XII.

                        THE JUNIOR ON LEAVE OUT.

    Saints’ Days—Early Leave Out—Poaching—Rowing—A Dinner—Sunday
    Leave Out,                                                         161

                              CHAPTER XIII.

                     THE JUNIOR IN STANDING-UP WEEK.

    Standing-up—Commoners—Pealing,                                     169

                              CHAPTER XIV.

                      THE JUNIOR IN ELECTION WEEK.

    “Ad Portas”—“Electors”—“Candlesticks”—“Founders”—Examinations—
    “Superannuates”—Medal Speaking—Election Dinners—Effects
    of Eating Ice when Hot—Resignation—“Domum”—“Ball”—“Jam
    Lucis”—“Batlings”—Last Breakfast,                                  174

                               CHAPTER XV.

    CONCLUSION,                                                        187

    GLOSSARY,                                                          197




[Illustration]




CHAPTER I.

INTRODUCTION.


It is now nearly half a century since, full of hope and spirits, I made
my appearance at Winchester College, when I entered the gates, proud of
my position as the junior Wykehamist; and more than forty years have
elapsed since I doffed my gown, and stepped forth into the outer world.

Times have changed since then, and perhaps in no place are the changes
more marked than in the old school. I was there at a remarkable period,
as, during my residence, important and much required improvements and
alterations were commenced in the system of internal economy, discipline,
and education, which have continually advanced to the present day, till
at last, in the opinion of some who are well fitted to form a judgment,
the operation has been so roughly carried on, that, together with the
customs that required extirpation, some institutions have been rooted up
which might as well have been allowed to remain.

Among the more beneficial changes I may mention the amelioration of the
fagging system, from which many of the asperities were removed while I
was in the position most capable of appreciating the benefit, and which
since my departure has been still further improved. I consider mitigated
fagging a valuable institution, and I think on this subject I can speak
with authority, as when I entered I was junior in College, and during
the whole five years that I was there I was always a fag, never having
sufficiently advanced in the school to taste the sweets of power. When I
went to Winchester the life of a junior was not made very pleasant to him
for the first year or two. I attribute this principally to the following
causes:—First and foremost, to the brutality of one or two boys; if
any such now exist, as there were in my time, (which I doubt,) their
opportunities and power of cruelty are so curtailed, and the feeling
against such proceedings both abroad and in the school so much stronger,
that their evil influence is reduced to a minimum. Secondly, to the
monstrous system of fagging at dinner-time, and the atrocities therewith
connected; the whole of which has been absolutely done away with. And,
lastly, to the unlimited extent to which watching out at cricket, and
kicking in at football, was carried; the former of which has now been
reduced within reasonable limits, and the latter entirely abolished.

Some of my friends have expressed themselves amused with such of my
school experiences as I have occasionally recited to them, and have from
time to time urged me to publish them. I do not think I should ever have
carried out the suggestion, had not circumstances occurred which induced
me, in 1860, to take up my quarters at Winchester for some weeks, when
I was naturally led to frequent my old haunts; and this brought many
long-forgotten scenes, thoughts, faces, and words so vividly to my
recollection, that I found a real pleasure and interest in noting them
down. Whether any one will take either pleasure or interest in reading
my notes when published, is perhaps doubtful; yet I know that, when I
was a boy at College, we were eager for any information about the former
manners and customs of the old place; and it is to the boys especially
that I address myself; and I hope that if this little book falls into
the hands of any of the juniors, they will derive some comfort from the
thought that although they may consider their own lives rather hard,
others have passed through far severer trials than theirs, unscathed,
and can yet look back to the time of their juniorship with interest
and regret. If I fail in interesting them it must be my own fault, as,
whatever my deficiencies in style and expression, I cannot plead want of
knowledge of my subject; I think also that I am impartial; I respect my
old school, and if I had boys, and could get them into it, I would send
them there; but I am not the least inclined to cry it up at the expense
of other similar establishments, of which I have had no experience. I am
certain, however, that there is no school where, at the present day, the
authorities take a more personal and careful interest in the moral and
physical wellbeing of the boys; and this is rendered more practicable at
Winchester than at most other public schools, owing to the number being
limited to about two hundred, instead of being allowed to expand till it
becomes rather a cluster of small schools than one solid establishment.[1]

If any of my own contemporaries ever glance over these pages, I hope
they will experience a pleasure in having some scenes brought again
before their minds’ eye with which they were once familiar, but of which
the remembrance had become fainter and fainter, as they have gradually
been shadowed over by the duties and struggles of after-life; though I
fear that any such satisfaction will be damped by the feeling of how
much better they might have been described by an abler pen.[2] I cannot
expect that my book will be noticed by anybody except Wykehamists, yet,
in case it should ever attract the notice of any one who is altogether
unacquainted with Winchester, I have given a description of the geography
of the buildings (in chap, ii.) and the institutions of the school,
lacking which the book would have been entirely without meaning to
them;—all such dissertations the Wykehamist will, of course, skip. I
have, however, omitted giving any account of the history, antiquities,
and architecture of the College, all of which have been amply described
in several works with which Wykehamists are very well acquainted, and
which others can easily procure if they desire any such information. I
simply propose as my task some account of the inner life of the boys as
it was, “Consule Planco,” illustrated by a picture of the trials and
amusements of a junior.

As I remarked above, I think fagging on the whole a laudable institution.
Some of the stories here related may not perhaps seem to put it in a
very pleasant light; but it must be remembered always, that it is much
mitigated at present, and also that, in a light and somewhat gossiping
production like this, there is more movement and life in such anecdotes
than in a relation of the ordinary kindnesses shown by the bigger to
the lesser boys; certainly, I have a more lasting general recollection
of benefits received than of cruelties suffered; and in after-life, in
the rough struggles of the world, happy is he who has gone through such
a training. Here there is no tuft-hunting—wealth and rank have little
influence, if the heart is not open and hand skilful. A boy learns
to help himself, not to be disheartened in difficulties, and to be
prepared for any emergency; and withal a keen sense of honour, friendly
rivalry, and patriotic feeling, is continually kept in action. Commend
me in a row, moral or physical, to your public schoolman: in the former
case, he will very probably be endowed with the judgment, decision, and
self-reliance so necessary in such an emergency; and in the latter, he
will be likely to stand firm, and know the use of his left hand as well
as his right, and when, where, and how to bring both into play.

[Illustration]

[Illustration: PLAN OF WINCHESTER COLLEGE 1835-40]




[Illustration]




CHAPTER II.

OF THE LOCUS IN QUO AND DRAMATIS PERSONÆ.

    Plan of College Buildings—Dons—College
    Præfects—Candlekeepers—Dress—Choristers—Commoner
    Buildings—Præfects—Coursekeeper.


Before entering into particulars it will be necessary to give the
non-Wykehamist reader some idea of the arrangement of the College
buildings, and of their various uses in the general economy of the
institution.

The College of St Mary of Winchester (near Winchester, as it used to
be called) was, in olden times, situated outside the town, but is now
bounded on its west side by the buildings of Kingsgate Street and College
Street. The entrance is from the latter street through a handsome portal
called “outer gate,” which opens into a quadrangle, on the east side
of which is the Warden’s house; passing through this court and another
gateway (“middle gate,” above which is “election chamber”) we enter
another spacious quadrangle, the southern side of which is formed by the
chapel and hall, the western mainly by the kitchen, and the remaining two
sides by the boys’ bed-chambers, (on the ground floor,) and the fellows’
and second master’s lodgings above. Underneath the hall, and close to the
great hall staircase, a passage called “seventh-chamber passage” leads
into a third quadrangle of smaller dimensions, called “school court,”
on the south of which is the school, and on the east the outside wall
of the chapel cloisters; along the entire western side of the College
buildings, from College Street to the school, extend the buildings of
Commoners, (the boys not on the foundation,) the communication of which
with College is through a door on the west side of “school court.” A
passage between the school and cloister wall leads to the playground or
“meads,” adjoining the west side of which, and divided from it by a red
brick wall, is the “sick house,” (hospital,) situated in another piece of
ground called “sick-house meads.”

The chief of the whole establishment is the Warden, who has nothing to do
with the teaching of the boys; he admits and when necessary expels them,
confers on them the dignity of “Præfect,” listens to their complaints,
and, in fact, in all matters appertaining to the management of the school
and the society is omnipotent. There are also ten Fellows, but as their
duties (if any) have nothing to do with the inner life of the school,
of which alone I purpose to treat, I need say nothing more of them. The
head master, or “the Doctor” as he is always called, lives in “Commoners’
buildings,” the inhabitants of which are supposed to be more particularly
under his jurisdiction. The second master, who has the more immediate
superintendence of the College boys, has, as above-mentioned, his
apartments in “chamber court.” There was also an assistant master, who
superintended the instruction of the boys in the lower classes, and who
did not live in College; and three commoner tutors, who had lodgings in
Commoners’, and whose services were called into requisition for general
instruction in school as required. There was also a mathematical master.

The school was divided into college boys and commoners; there was a
great competition to be enrolled among the former, as they have several
privileges, the greatest of which was the chance of gaining a fellowship
at New College, Oxford. I will introduce these first. There were seventy
of them; of these the eighteen seniors were called “Præpostors,” or
(more commonly) “Præfects,” and had the power of “fagging” all the rest,
with some few exceptions. Among these eighteen, one, (generally, but not
always,) the senior in school, was called the “Præfect of hall,” and was
invested with almost absolute power, being looked upon by the “Inferiors”
(_i.e._ those who were not præfects) with something more than a becoming
awe and reverence. Some of his principal duties were to take the boys
“on to hills,” call names there, pay for broken windows in hall, find
the rods, &c. In school he had the seat of honour next to the doctor’s
chair, and he always slept in sixth chamber. There were many little fees
attached to this responsible office, which brought to the fortunate
possessor an income of certainly not less than fifty pounds a year. Next
to him in dignity was the “Præfect of tub,” (this title was derived
from a box in hall called “tub,” the use of which will be hereafter
explained,) whose office was more particularly connected with the dinner
department. Then there were two “Præfects of chapel,” one of whom, on
alternate weeks, called names there, and during that week was called
Præfect of chapel “in course,” and, in case of absence of the Præfect
of hall, undertook his duties. There was also a “Præfect of school,”
who had to pay for all internal damage done to the interior of that
edifice, including broken windows, to keep it clean, to light it, and
once every year to renew the cushions of the masters’ seats. To all these
offices some emolument in the shape of salary or fees was attached, but
considerably less than that received by the Præfect of hall. The eight
senior præfects were said to have “full power,” and had some slight
privileges not enjoyed by the remaining ten, who were generally called
“Bluchers.”

As mentioned above, almost all the inferiors were subject to these
eighteen; there were, however, the following exceptions:—“The Senior
inferior,” who was exempted from fagging, to give him an opportunity
of calmly contemplating the dignity in store for him; and the seven
“Candlekeepers,” (why so called, I have no idea, nor have I ever heard
any interpretation of the appellation.) These were the seven inferiors
who had been longest in the school, quite independently of their position
in it; they were generally old and tough. Of these, the senior had almost
as much power as a præfect; he had a “valet” in chambers, one or two
“breakfast fags,” and the power of fagging the twenty juniors when in
school, or in meads. The junior candlekeeper was called “the Deputy,”
and had also some slight privileges besides that of having a valet and
breakfast-fag, which was common to all of them. The organisation of the
fagging department was supposed to be in the hands of the candlekeepers,
but practically it was all arranged by the Senior and Deputy; and there
was a theory, that if it at any time broke down, and no fags could be
found, the præfects in full power had the right to fag the candlekeepers;
this, however, was very rarely, if ever, acted upon.

It may easily be imagined, that the offices of Senior candlekeeper and
Deputy were regarded with peculiar interest by the small juniors, as when
these posts were filled by cross individuals, the lives of the latter
were not seldom made a burden to them.

When a præfect required the services of a fag, he called out, “Junior!”
and the junior, in hall or chamber, or wherever it might be, had to “run.”

The order of seniority in fagging depended, in College, solely on the
length of time the boys had been at the school, and was entirely
independent of their position otherwise. A certain number of boys were
of “Founder’s kin,” to which certain privileges attached, which will be
hereafter mentioned.

As regards dress, the College boys wore any trousers they liked; but
instead of an ordinary coat and waistcoat, they were usually habited in
a black, green, or brown (the latter colours were seldom worn except
by præfects, or very responsible inferiors) waistcoat, with an upright
collar, and sleeves of the same material, and a serge gown, with full
sleeves buttoning above or just below the elbow; the gown, in walking,
was very commonly tucked up in a bunch behind.

Inferiors were never allowed to wear hats inside the College walls; the
præfects seldom doffed theirs, except in the presence of a master and
when they went to bed; all were obliged to wear white neckcloths and
bands, except when on leave out; and surplices in chapel on Sundays and
saints’ days.

[Illustration: OLD COMMONERS.

During the years 1839-1841 the picturesque Old Commoners was demolished.
It was built by Dr Burton, and formed an irregular quadrangle. On the
west side were the head-master’s house, an excellent ball-court, and
upper and lower cloister galleries, built over a small cloister; on the
north was “Wickham’s” buildings, containing the Hall of the juniors,
various dormitories, and the residence of the tutors; on the south were
upper and lower conduit galleries, part of the ancient “Sustern Spital,”
and divided into dormitories above, and below into apartments for the
matron, and three “Continent Rooms” or sick bays. On the ground-floor,
to the west of the inner entrance, were the “Hatches,” from which the
bread or “sines,” and cans of beer, called “jorams,” were issued; the
kitchens, etc.; opening into a small court, containing a dormitory, known
as “New Room.” On the other side were the prefects’ and the tutors’
studies. On the east side of Commoners’ Court was the wall of the college
stables, and a range of fine elm-trees, destroyed with one exception
during a violent summer-storm in 1836. Underneath the survivor was the
“long bench,” so frequented in “standing-up time.” The entrance-gate
stood where the west gate of modern commoners is at present. Parallel
with the east side of the court, and to the southward of the tutors’
studies, was the “dining hall;” and above it was a set of sleeping-rooms,
upper and lower hall galleries. On the westward of the hall was “the
conduit.”—WALCOTT’S _William of Wykeham and his Colleges_.]

Besides the Warden, fellows, masters, and boys, there were twelve
“Choristers,” who must by no means be omitted, as they formed an
important part of the internal economy. I suppose they were called
Choristers because they had not to sing; certainly if ever that was a
part of their duty, it had entirely lapsed. Their office was to wait on
the boys, in hall and chambers, till seven o’clock, and especially to
go on errands in the town,—the boys themselves never being allowed to
go there, except when invited by friends on saints’ days. These little
Choristers wore chocolate-coloured tail-coats and trousers, with metal
buttons; and, on the whole, I think their life must have been a weary one.

In Commoners’, the number of boys fluctuated between one hundred and
one hundred and thirty. The building called “Commoners’,” in which they
slept and had their meals, skirted the west side of College, and had
its entrance also in College Street. It would be useless to describe
the buildings of Commoners’ as they existed in my time; they were not
in any way remarkable, and are now entirely removed, and other and more
commodious edifices, though, perhaps, not much more beautiful, built in
their place.

There were twelve Præfects in Commoners, who had the right of fagging all
the rest except those in the class immediately below them, (called senior
part the fifth,) who were exempt; when they required the services of a
Fag, they did not call “Junior!” but “Here!” They also had an officer
whose duties and privileges were somewhat similar to those of Senior
Candlekeeper and Deputy in College; his office, however, was conferred by
election among the Præfects. It was necessary that he should be in either
middle or junior part the fifth, of reasonable bodily strength, and have
been at least three years in commoners. This dignitary was called “the
Coursekeeper;” should he be promoted into senior part the fifth, he
retained the privileges of the office without its responsibilities, and
was called “Ex-coursekeeper.”

The College boys and Commoners rose at the same hour, attended chapel,
used the school, and went on to Hill’s together; but the latter took
their meals and slept in Commoners’, and had not the use of meads, having
a field about half a mile distant, to which they went from twelve to one
on whole school days, and again, in the afternoon, on holidays.

The rule of seniority, as regarded fagging, was different from that
established in College. Commoner Inferiors took precedence according
to their standing in the school, not according to the length of time
they had been there. It will be seen, from what has been said, that the
College juniors had a much harder time of it than the Commoners, as the
former were in the proportion of forty-four Fags to eighteen Præfects and
seven Candlekeepers, whereas in the latter (supposing the number of the
boys to be one hundred and twenty, and twenty to be in senior part the
fifth, and exempt from fagging) the proportion would be eighty-seven
fags to twelve Præfects and one Coursekeeper. I will, therefore, devote
my attention principally to the illustration of the life of the College
Fag, which, in fact, combines all the trials and amusements of both.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]




CHAPTER III.

TREATS OF SOME MANNERS AND CUSTOMS.

    A Fag’s Duties—His Respect for Præfects—Præfects’
    Responsibilities—Code of Honour—Lying Scouted—Exceptional
    Anecdote—Certain Things considered Common
    Property—Slang—Nicknames of Officials and Under-Porter—Whole
    Holidays—Remedies—Half Holidays—Sundays—Hills.


The duties of a Fag, in the days of which I write, may be more easily
described by informing the reader what he had not to do, than by
endeavouring to make out a list of his positive duties. I believe when
I say that he had not to make the beds, nor to clean shoes, I have
exhausted the negative catalogue.

The degree of awe with which we Juniors used to regard the Præfects
seems to me, looking back, most mysterious; and it would be impossible to
make a stranger realise the peculiar sensation. It was entirely a moral
feeling, not being in any way connected with muscular power—many of the
Præfects being, in physical strength, inferior to their fags; and it was
by no means uncommon to see a small Præfect rising on his toes to reach
the proper height for administering an effective “Clow” (box on the ear)
to an offending Junior some inches taller, and a stone heavier, than
himself. Nor was there the slightest imputation of cowardice on the part
of the bigger boy,—I cannot explain it, but it seemed simply impossible
to resist.

I never was a Præfect myself; and when I was a big Inferior, I have
more than once received, with perfect meekness, a “Tunding” (thrashing
with a stick) from a boy who, had he been an Inferior, would have
treated me with the greatest respect. I remember, on one such occasion,
the operator, indignant at not being able to make me feel, searched
underneath my waistcoat to see if I was not padded for the occasion,
(not an uncommon proceeding by any means;) and on finding such was not
the case, took the small end of the stick in his hand, and finished the
performance with the butt end, and principally on my head. Nor, when
ordered to “hold down” (_i.e._, put your head in a convenient position)
for a “Clow,” would the victim dare to ward off the blow, or cease
offering his cheek to the smiter till it pleased the latter to desist.

Indeed, the moment a boy was made a Præfect, he seemed immediately to
become invested with a supernatural power that changed the familiar
intercourse with his former companions into awe or respect on the one
side, and tyranny or condescension on the other, according to the nature
of the individual promoted. I remember, soon after my first arrival,
and before I had quite realised the great gulf between a Præfect and an
Inferior, during breakfast-time in hall, I saw one of the Fags put aside
his master’s frying-pan, it being required no longer. As I was in want of
one at the moment, in the innocence of my heart, I politely asked the
Præfect, who was its owner, if he would be so good as to lend it to me. I
thought he looked rather queer, but, being a good-natured youth, he said,
“Yes;” when the loud burst of laughter from the other boys proclaimed
that something unusual had happened. On inquiry, I found that it was my
astounding impertinence in making such a request of a Præfect that had
caused the excitement, and for some little time I was looked on as quite
a hero.

Though, at first sight, this kind of superstitious awe of the Inferiors
towards the Præfects may seem unprofitable, yet I am inclined to think
that, on the whole, it was not without its advantages. Certainly, in some
exceptional cases, a Præfect used to take advantage of his position,
and treat those beneath him cruelly; but such, at any rate, was not the
general character of the Præfects in my time; and most of them used
their power far more in preventing the big Inferiors from bullying their
companions, than in inflicting torture themselves.

The Præfects had the entire charge of the boys out of school, and were
responsible to the masters for all breaches of discipline committed
by the others, for which they (the Præfects) were punished; it was,
therefore, their interest as well as duty to see the laws carried
out. When a delinquent was discovered, he received his punishment at
once from the Præfect under whose jurisdiction the offence fell. This
generally consisted of any given number of stripes on the back, varying
from a dozen to about fifty, according to the character of the offence,
or the disposition of the performer. The sticks used for this purpose
were supple young ash plants, familiarly called “Ground Ashes,” and the
supplying them to the Præfects formed quite a profitable branch of trade
to some individuals in the town, as the consumption was considerable.

As I mentioned above, this kind of thrashing was called “Tunding,” and,
for any grave offence, it was administered by the Præfect of Hall on the
raised dais at the end of hall, in presence of all the boys, and was then
called “a Tunding on top of Hall.” I believe the system worked well.
It would have been impossible for the Masters to have been continually
spying after the boys; and the confidence placed in the Præfects
strengthened their character, inasmuch as, for the most part, they felt
proud of the trust confided to them, and conscientiously endeavoured
to fulfil their duties. The public Tundings were almost always fairly
conducted, being generally adequate, but not excessive, and could not be
classed with the severe bullying that some few Præfects carried on behind
the scenes, where there was no public to control either the manner or the
quantity of punishment administered.

A high tone of honour was kept up in the school, truth being scrupulously
adhered to between the boys themselves, and by them towards the Masters,
except in one particular, (which exception, indeed, was caused by an
honourable feeling crookedly developed,) and this was when telling the
truth would bring _another_ individual into trouble.

On these occasions, the most tremendous lies were sometimes considered
justifiable:—_e.g._, The Doctor comes suddenly round a corner, and finds
Tibbs mopping the rosy fluid from his nose with a rueful countenance,
having just received a sharp back-hander from one of his lords and
masters, whose basin he has broken:—

“Pray, what may be the matter with you?” inquires the Doctor.

“Fell down and hurt my nose, sir,” whimpers Tibbs.

_Dr._ “But the ground is muddy, and your clothes clean.”

_T._ “Only touched the ground with my nose, sir.”

But I can give a more comprehensive example in an occurrence that I
well remember. One night, in one of the chambers, the boys were up and
amusing themselves with the operation of a “Toefitying,” which consists
in noosing the toe of a sleeper in a piece of string, and then pulling,
concerning which pastime more anon. Badger was trying to operate
on Reynard, who, (though pretending to be asleep, was really wide
awake,) gently stealing his hand from under the bedclothes, clutched a
Donnegan, and launched it at Badger’s head, who, being thereby floored,
mechanically replied with his extinguished candlestick, extinguisher,
snuffers, and all, which unfortunately took effect, and inflicted a deep
cut on Reynard’s lip. The next morning, as Reynard was not producible,
one of the Masters made affectionate inquiries respecting him. On hearing
that he had cut his lip, he inquired, “How?” No one had an idea.

_Master._ “Send for Reynard.”

[_Appears Reynard with his head in a sling._]

_M._ “How did you cut your lip?”

_R._ “Woke in the night, sir, and found my lip bleeding; think something
must have struck it.”

_M._ “Tell the Senior Præfect in the chamber to come to me.”

[_Præfect appears._] _M._ “Toller, what was going on in your chamber last
night?”

_T._ “Don’t know, sir, as I was fast asleep.” (_N.B._—He was eating
toasted cheese at the time immediately opposite the scene of action.)

The other boys of the chamber being sent for in proper order, some
thought they heard a noise, but were certain it was caused by boys from
another chamber, (the latter part being true for a wonder;) another
thought he detected Pudding’s voice; by a curious coincidence, Pudding
happened to have been sleeping at sick-house on that particular night;
and so on.

But if by any chance an individual was likely to receive punishment in
consequence of any self-sacrificing fiction, I need not say that the real
delinquent always stepped forth at once and claimed his right to the
infliction. I never knew an instance of a boy spontaneously informing
a Master of any misdemeanour committed by another. This, although
commendable as a general rule, might, on some rare occasions, (in cases
of bullying by Præfects for example,) be infringed with advantage. In the
matter of certain articles, which were strictly defined, and which, if I
remember rightly, consisted of stationery, knives, faggots, crockery, and
eatables supplied by the College, we used to put a liberal interpretation
on the eighth commandment, these being looked upon to a certain extent as
common property; and it was considered fair “to make” (_i.e._, take) them
if you could. Of course, if discovered, certain results would follow,
but no moral offence was imputed. All other articles were governed by
the usual laws which define the difference between _meum_ and _tuum_;
and I need not say that, as regards money, the most rigid probity was
enforced; and if a boy was ever suspected of improperly meddling with
another’s capital, the affair was diligently inquired into, and, if found
guilty, the punishment of the delinquent was condign, and the disgrace
ineffaceable.

Popjoy and Hopper on one occasion made a bet, the subject of which was
that, during the ensuing fortnight, each should endeavour to “make” as
many knives as possible, the possessor of the greater number at the end
of the appointed time to be the winner. They set to work diligently,
and, by the end of the time, had nearly collected all the knives in
the school. On comparing their booty, Hopper was found to have a small
majority. Popjoy, discontented at the result, proposed another trial,
which being assented to, just before the final day Hopper found that the
whole of his stock had disappeared, having been successfully swept off by
his now triumphant antagonist.

The Winchester slang is very peculiar and expressive, and I confess
that I regard it with much affection. Some of the words can hardly
be expressed in English without considerable periphrasis; (_vide_
Glossary-words, “to junket over,” to “thoke upon,” &c.) Besides the
slang, there are other peculiarities in the language. The definite
article is never used in connexion with any of the institutions,
buildings, or localities connected with College; _e.g._, one never spoke
of “_the_ Hall, _the_ Election, _the_ Warden’s Stream;” it was always
“Election,” “Hall,” “Warden’s Stream,” &c. When speaking of persons, it
was permitted, as “the Doctor, the Warden.”

The names of many of the College _employées_ were hereditary nicknames,
which often passed on to the new-comer with his office. I dare say there
still exists a Dungy, Whitesman, Purver, Long John, &c. &c., though the
original owners of the names, or the derivations of the nicknames, (if
they were so,) have long since been forgotten. There was an exception to
this in the case of the Under-Porter, the nomenclature of the occupant of
which office was settled on a different principle. When I first came to
Winchester, he rejoiced in the name of Obadiah. I suppose the original
Under-Porter’s name was Malachi, and that, after him, the catalogue of
books of the Old Testament was followed up in due order; for when Obadiah
relinquished his post, his successor was named Amos; and, on Amos’s
retirement, Joel stepped into his vacant shoes; and as I was there five
years, and during that time three different Under-Porters wielded the
keys,—if they have since succeeded at the same rate, the name of the
present officer would be Esther.

In the times I write of, we had a good deal of relaxation from our
studies,—rather too much, indeed, I used to think, during my first year;
for at that time I considered school-time a decided change for the
better from my very arduous duties, when we were supposed to be amusing
ourselves. As time wore on, I found these labours rather alleviated, and
I ultimately began to think a whole holiday not such a bad institution
after all. We had plenty of them. In the short half, we had at least one
“Remedy” and a half every week, and in summer two always; they were on
Tuesdays and Thursdays. These “Remedies” were a kind of mitigated whole
holidays. We were supposed to go into school for an hour or two in the
morning and afternoon; but as no Master was present, it didn’t come
to much. This was called “Books Chambers.” Remedies were not a matter
of right, but were always specially applied for by Præfect of hall on
Tuesdays and Thursdays. The custom was for him to waylay the Doctor on
his way to morning Chapel, and make the request, when, if granted, a gold
ring was handed to the applicant, on which was engraved, “_Commendat
rarior usus_.” This ring was worn by the Præfect of hall for the rest of
the day, and returned by him to the Doctor at the beginning of middle
school on the day following.

We had whole holidays on all Saints’ days and Founder’s anniversaries,
on which occasions we were allowed to go out,—if invited by friends in
the country, for the whole day; or if by friends in the town, for the
afternoon. Of course when there was a Saint’s day in the week we only had
one “Remedy.”

Half holidays were not unfrequent; whenever a distinguished Wykehamist
visited Winchester, a deputation of boys waited on him, with a request
that he would ask the Doctor for one; also, if any boy gained a
scholarship at Oxford or Cambridge, or having been at Winchester,
distinguished himself at the universities or in public life, or if there
was an addition to the family of any of the masters, (an event which
I have known to happen while I was at Winchester,) a half holiday was
petitioned for, and generally with success.

Sunday was the Fag’s best holiday, for even he participated in some
degree of the rest which is enjoined for the man-servant and maid-servant
on that day. We had a “Thoke,” (_i.e._, we did not get up) till eight
o’clock Chapel, and attended Cathedral service, which commenced with the
Litany at half-past ten; we went into school from four to five to do
Greek Testament, and to Chapel again at five. In Cloister-time, Sixth
book, and Senior part went into school from seven to eight P.M., which
period was called “Grotius time,” after the author whose work, “De
Veritate,” was then substituted for Greek Testament.

On Holidays and “Remedies” we were turned out for a couple of hours on to
“St Catherine’s Hill,” (a green eminence about a mile from College, with
a clump of trees at the top, which was surrounded by a deep trench—the
remains of a Roman camp,)—once before breakfast,(“Morning Hills,”) and
again in the afternoon, (“Middle Hills.”) In summer we also went out
after dinner, (“Evening Hills,”) when we did not ascend the aforesaid
mountain, but disported ourselves in the water-meadows beneath. These
outgoings were called “Going on to Hills” and “Under Hills” respectively.

Having now, I hope, put the reader pretty well _au courant_ as to the
scene of action, the authorities, and some of the institutions and
customs of Winchester, I will endeavour to give as accurate an account
as I can (considering the time that has elapsed since I was at school)
of the inner life of the boys,—as it was in those days,—and will proceed
to introduce the Fag on his first arrival, and then conduct you (kind
reader) with him through our Chambers, Hall, Chapel, School, and Meads,
and give a cursory sketch of his proceedings on a “Lockback Holiday,
Hills, and Leave-out, and during Standing-up and Election weeks.”




[Illustration]




CHAPTER IV.

THE JUNIOR’S START IN COLLEGE LIFE.

    πεμπε—Tin Gloves—Test of Founder’s Kin—Tutor and Pupil—The Fag
    “in Course.”


In this chapter, I propose to recount some of the solemnities attendant
on the first appearance of a new boy. I need not go through a list of the
ordinary questions and chaffings to which a greenhorn is subjected at
all schools, but will confine myself to some of the ordeals peculiar to
Winchester in the dark ages of which I write. On the first appearance of
Green in school, Humbug would ask him, with an air of sympathy, if he had
a book entitled “πεμπε μωρον προτερον,” (send the fool farther,) without
which it would be impossible for him to get up properly his appointed
task. On finding that he has not a copy of the work in question, Humbug
would offer his own which he had lent to Brown, and to whom he despatches
Green to get it. Brown, however, having lent it to Jones, Green goes
to him, who refers him to Robinson, who sends him down to sick-house,
whence he is again sent back to school, and, after numerous similar
peregrinations, he is ultimately referred to one of the Masters, who soon
puts an end to his search.

But there were other ordeals that were not quite so harmless. Green was
liable to be asked whether he possessed a pair of “Tin gloves.” As this
article does not generally form part of a boy’s outfit, Bully would
proceed to furnish him with a pair in the following manner:—Taking a
half-consumed stick from the fire, he would draw the “red-hot end” down
the back of Greens hand between each of the knuckles to the wrist, and,
having produced three satisfactory lines of blisters, would then make two
or three transverse lines across. A scientifically fitted pair of gloves
of this description was generally, if not pleasant wear, at any rate, of
great durability.

Bully might then, perhaps, inquire of the wretched Green if he was of
“Founder’s kin,” and, whatever his answer, proceed to test the assertion
by trying to break a plate on his head—the theory being that, if the
plate broke first, his descent was proved.

Each boy, on his arrival, was allotted to a Præfect as his pupil,
who was called his tutor, and was supposed to exercise a general
superintendence over his morals and manners, to purge his exercises from
the grosser faults, protect him from the unjust treatment of other boys,
and generally to “Teejay”[3] him. It was ordinarily an advantageous
arrangement to both parties. My old friend Dummy, however, was not
fortunate in the selection made for him; he was handed over to a
tutor, who, by way of taking a great interest in his welfare, prevented
other boys from thrashing his pupil by operating on him so constantly
himself, that they scarcely had any chance of so doing. The tutor was
tall, thin, bullet-headed, and apparently about forty-five years of
age, and he used, from time to time, to conduct his pupil into a quiet
corner, and, with a cheerful smile beaming on his countenance, would
give himself a few minutes’ healthy, but not too violent, exercise. He
was economical, and found that a stout cane, tied with wax thread at
the end, was a less expensive chest-opener than a ground-ash, which was
not only very liable to break, but extracted less entertainment than
the thicker weapon. He was not very muscular, or the consequences might
have been serious. As it was, wherever Dummy went to bathe, a number of
spectators always assembled to see his back, which, from the nape of his
neck to his ankles, was a network of intersecting bruises. Dummy’s skin
gradually got as tough as a hippopotamus’s, and I don’t think it did
him much harm. At any rate, I saw him last year in rude health. He was
delighted to see me; and he told me that, not long before, he had met his
venerated tutor at a railway station in Northumberland, looking still
about forty-five, and apparently a bishop or dean, or something of that
sort, with a Gothic waistcoat, and a broad-brimmed hat, and altogether so
little altered, that Dummy’s body gave an instinctive shrink as it passed
him, in expectation of the never-failing blow or kick that used to follow
immediately on his propinquity.

A fortnight’s breathing-time was allowed to every new boy before he
commenced Fagging, to give him the necessary leisure to learn what would
be expected of him; at the expiration of which period his duties began,
and he was said to be “in Course.” Such is the natural craving in the
human mind for change, that I remember, in my case, I was quite impatient
for the time of probation to expire, that I might indulge in the manly
exercise of Fagging.




[Illustration]




CHAPTER V.

THE JUNIOR IN CHAMBERS.

    Choosing Chambers—Furniture of Chambers—Junior’s
    Duties—Toy-time—Mess—Sound Sleepers—Sitting up—The
    Scheme—Toefitying—Spree Mess—Theatricals.


In the centre quadrangle (_vide_ Plan) are situated the seven Chambers
in which the College boys sleep. They are on the ground-floor, and are
called, after their respective numbers, “First,” “Second,” “Third,” &c.
The number of beds varied in each, the largest (Seventh, which used to
be the school before the present was built, about two centuries ago)
containing thirteen, the smallest (Fifth) eight.

I will suppose our Fag to have been located in Fourth, and, for the
benefit of the uninitiated reader, I will endeavour to sketch this
somewhat remarkable apartment. There are nine beds made of massive
timber, coeval with the College, with a solid wooden canopy and
sides, extending a quarter of the way down the bed. This canopy was
generally papered inside with coloured prints, and wherein was fixed a
“Reading-shelf” for books, and candlestick. The beds were comfortable,
and I have never enjoyed sleep more than I have in those quaint old
receptacles. By the side of each was a chest of about three feet long,
in which clothes were kept, and it also served as a seat whereon to
sit at “Toys.” This was a kind of bureau, the upper part of which was
fitted with shelves for books, where might be found also tea and other
groceries, crockery, and odds and ends innumerable; the lower part opened
and formed a desk. If a search was to be made under our Junior’s bed,
one would have found two candle-boxes, one for rushlights, and the other
for “Tollys,” as the moulded article was generally named, three or
four tin coffee-pots, two large tin boilers for water, (called “Toe-pan
boilers,”) a large earthenware bath, (the “Toe-pan,”) a huge jug of
beer, (the “Nipperkin,”) and lots of candlesticks. Behind the door was
a pile of faggots; in the centre of the room was fixed a strong wooden
“post” or pillar, and alongside of it a form, on which were placed three
or four “Washing-drawers,” (_i.e._, oaken dressing-cases.) Opposite the
window yawned the great fireplace, with its dogs, on which rested the
faggots and bars for the reception of the array of boilers. Above it was
a rushlight, (fixed in a circular iron pan fastened to a staple in the
wall; it was called “The Functior;”) and on each side of it a strong
four-legged table, (or “Washing-stool,”) at which sat the two Præfects.
Around the walls above the beds were inserted, on slabs of slate or
stone, the names of former heroes who had passed safely through the
trials of a College Junior, and there many a boy could see the names of
his ancestors looking down on him, and silently bidding him be of good
heart.

When viewed in the daytime, and devoid of its occupants, the _tout
ensemble_ is somewhat dreary; but when the boys are there, and the fire
blazing, a great change comes over the scene, and whether prejudice or
what, I will not pretend to say; but I can call to mind no scene so cosy
and cheerful, especially when, having turned into bed after a hard day’s
work, I used drowsily to watch the darting flames till I gradually sunk
into dreams of quiet home, or of a paradise of everlasting cricket and
football, where there was no “Watching out” or “Kicking in.”

Chambers were chosen at the beginning of each half year by the Præfects,
in order—the Præfect of hall always being, in Sixth, _ex officio_. Every
chamber had two Præfects, and to four three were allotted. There was also
a Candlekeeper to each chamber, who made their selection in rotation;
the other boys were chosen by the Præfects. Each of the Præfects and the
Candlekeepers had a Fag for his “Valet,” whose duty it was to prepare
his tea or coffee in the evening, get him water of a morning, carry his
washing things and books through to school after morning Chapel, and back
again in the evening. The second Junior in Chamber had the charge of the
crockery, and was bound to produce a pint-cup at any period of the day if
one was demanded by a Præfect.

The Junior in Chamber had a hard time of it; for, in addition to being
the Candlekeeper’s Valet, he had to get up in the morning when “Rat
Williams” came and rattled at the door, call the other boys, light the
fire, clean candlesticks, get in his Master’s water, clean his basin when
it so required, (a tedious and disagreeable process, done by rubbing
it with earth picked up from between the flints of Quad,) and wash
himself,—this last was not a luxurious occupation at six o’clock on a
cold winter’s morning, inasmuch as he had to go out in the dark, rain,
snow, or frost, and perform his ablutions in the open air at “Conduit,”
which was the name given to half a dozen brass cocks fixed in the west
wall of Chamber Quad, and the water in which not seldom required thawing
with fire before it could be persuaded to flow. While endeavouring to
get through his multifarious duties, he had to keep a sharp ear on the
performance of the Chapel bell, and to call out accordingly, “First
peal!” “Second peal!” and “Bells down!” Then the advent of the Head
or Second Master had to be duly announced by shouting, “Willerly or
Ridsworth going in,” as the case might be; and lastly, when they had gone
in, to give the final call, “Willerly or Ridsworth in.” Then there was
a rush into Chapel, where names were called, and all too late to answer
“Sum” got an imposition of thirty lines. Before going into Chapel, the
Doctor used generally to walk up and down “Sands,” (_i.e._, the flags
on the south side of Quad, under the Chapel windows;) this was to give
an opportunity to those who wished to “go Continent,” (_i.e._, go to
hospital,) to send for permission, and, on Tuesdays and Thursdays, to the
Prefect of hall to ask for a “Remedy.”

[Illustration: THE OLD CONDUIT—WASHING IN COURT.]

After Chapel, all the boys (the Valets laden with their Masters’ goods
and chattels) left Chambers for school quad. After this, till about
half-past six P.M., Chambers remained deserted. From seven till eight
P.M., the boys had to sit at their toys, to learn their lessons, and do
their “Vulguses;” quiet was kept, and sometimes one of the Masters looked
round. During this period of “Toy-time,” as it was called, the Præfects
sat at their washing-stools on each side of the fire; and when from time
to time a fresh faggot was put on, and the warmth became oppressive, a
Junior was sometimes summoned to stand between their majesties and the
blaze. The living screen was obliged to keep continually revolving, and
to pull out his trousers from the more fully developed parts of his
person, or he ran a risk of being scorched. Fortunately the fierceness of
the blaze soon subsided, when the screen was permitted to withdraw.

Toy-time over, the Valets set to work to make their Masters’ coffee or
tea, (“Mess.”) We used to make the former very good, our plan being
to let it simmer for a long time, but on no account to boil over. In
Belgium and France, however, where it is still better, I find they never
boil the coffee, but simply pour scalding water over it.

In summer, the Præfects’ washing-stools were often set out in Quad, under
the shadow of the Chapel buttresses, and the repast would consist of
“Made beer,” (College swipes bottled with rice, a few raisins, sugar, and
nutmeg to make it “up,”) bread, cheese, salad, lobsters, &c.

The Juniors got their tea (“Sus”) anyhow,—generally in bed,—and swigged
it out of a pint-cup; and how delicious it was! Not unfrequently it was
accompanied by a “Thoker,”—_i.e._, the evening ration of bread soaked
slightly in water, and then put down to bake near the hot ashes.

Evening Chapel took place at nine, immediately after which the Inferiors
had to go to bed; the Præfects were allowed to sit up till ten. How sweet
was sleep in those days, and so sound, that on one occasion, when called
in the morning, I found myself unable to move; on struggling to rise,
I got the point of a stick in my eye, and gradually became aware that
all the faggots in chamber had been piled on the bed during my slumber,
without disturbing me in the least. On another occasion, (in which I was
an active instead of a passive agent,) we corded up a boy, mattress,
bedclothes, and all, so tight that he could not stir, (during which
operation he slept soundly,) and was finally cut out by the bedmaker
after Chapel. Again; one night I was sitting up in bed reading, and was
very much disturbed by the obdurate snoring of another boy at the end of
the room. Being unable to make him desist, and wishing to go to sleep,
I put out my candle by throwing it at him; it struck the wall above his
head, upon which he gave a grunt and a start, ceased snoring, and we all
went to sleep. The next morning when he woke, he found the wick of the
candle lying like a worm on his pillow, the whole of the grease having
soaked into his hair.

Almost all the Fag’s lessons were learnt in Chambers at Toy-time, or
sitting up at night, as, during two-thirds of the time in school, they
were repeating their lessons, and the Fagging during the rest of the day
was continuous. There was a curious kind of understanding between the
Masters and boys about sitting up at night. Two or three days a-week,
one of the Masters used to make the round of the Chambers about eleven
o’clock. As he passed each window, he could quite easily, and generally
did, look in. In all probability he would see the Præfects at their
washing-stools hard at work, and two-thirds of the other boys sitting
up in bed reading, writing, or learning lines by heart,—the former with
two, and the latter with one candle each. On opening the door with his
Master-key, (which was not generally done with extreme rapidity,) what a
different scene would present itself to his eyes,—a room dimly lighted by
a rushlight, with eight or nine boys in bed, apparently fast asleep, and
snoring particularly loud. At the first rattle of the key, the Præfects,
having their beds previously turned down, extinguished the candles,
shut up their books, and dashed into bed, boots, clothes, and all,—a
proceeding that long practice had rendered quite easy. Those in bed,
with a sweep of the arm, drew under the clothes candlestick, ink, paper,
hooks, and all. Sometimes a Præfect was not quick enough, or a Junior had
gone to sleep with his candle alight, in both of which cases the former
got the punishment, the Inferior settling his part of the reckoning with
the Præfect afterwards.

There was more sitting up at night in the summer half year than in
the winter, as at that time Præfects were busy preparing for Election
Chamber, and Inferiors for “Standing up,” (_v.i._) At that time, we used
not only to borrow from the night, but the morning also; and we had a
method of calling ourselves which was rather ingenious. It was called
“The Scheme,” and was arranged as follows:—The Functior was known to
burn at a certain rate—say an inch an hour—if it was lighted at nine
o’clock, and we wanted to rise at four, seven inches only were allowed
to protrude above the socket, (the rest being cut off,) around which a
quantity of paper was arranged, and a string tied, which was carried
through a hole in the top of a Junior’s bed; to the end of this string a
parcel of books, or a pint-cup of water, was fastened, (if the latter,
it was called “a Water Scheme,” and another string connected the bottom
of the cup with the canopy of the bed.) When the candle burnt down, it
ignited the paper and burnt the string, causing the books (or water) to
fall, which roused the subincumbent sleeper, who proceeded to wake the
rest. One Scheme was sufficient to wake the whole school if required;
for in every other Chamber that contained any boys who wished to rise
early, a victim was selected whose toe was secured in a noose of string,
the other end of which was tied to the window-bar; so that the original
schemer, by walking round Quad and tugging at the different strings,
could soon rouse them all. This led to a very amusing incident on a
certain occasion. One of the Masters who had lately arrived (and who,
not having been educated at Winchester, was not up to the ways of the
place) was going round Chambers with a friend, an old Wykehamist, who
had been dining with him. While Mr ⸺ went into Third, his friend remained
outside. Suddenly catching sight of a string tied to a bar of the window,
and knowing well what was at the other end, he took a steady pull at it
just as the Master had got to the middle of Chamber; the consequence was,
that the unfortunate fish at the other end, who, by the by, was a severe
stammerer, dashed out of bed, and, with a shattered howl, plunged past
the astonished Master with one foot in the air, till he brought his toe
up to the window-sill.

This little scene brings to my mind the demoniacal diversion of
“Toefitying.” Occasionally some wicked boy would arise in the night, and,
gently removing the bedclothes from the feet of an unsuspecting sleeper,
endeavour to noose one of his toes with string, when, if successful, the
consequence would be similar to that above described.

[Illustration: TOEFITYING, AND THE SCHEME.]

Before the end of my first half year, I became a difficult subject,
though, as above mentioned, a hard sleeper; yet if anybody laid the
gentlest finger on the bedclothes near my feet, to spring up, seize
the nearest missile, and launch it at the intruder, was the work of an
instant. An ingenuity, worthy of being devoted to better purposes, was
displayed by Bolter in elaborating this foolish practical joke. He fixed
a fishing-reel, with its line, to the leg of his washing-stool; and
having passed the end of the line through a staple fastened to the post
in the centre of the room, he then tied to it other lines equal in number
to the boys in Chamber. Having secured each line to the toe of a boy, he
then proceeded to wind up the reel briskly, the effect being that, in a
twinkling, he had all the boys standing in a bouquet round the post with
one leg extended. This little incident has been depicted by our artist in
the plate entitled “Toefitying.”

On rare occasions, the boys used to get up at night and have supper.
Once (this was before my time) a feast was going on, when, on an alarm
being given that a Master was coming round, one of the boys seized a hot
roasted duck and crammed it into the sleeve of his gown, just before the
Master entered. There being a strong flavour of cooking, he inquired the
cause; on which the boy suggested that the same perfume would probably
be found in the adjoining Chamber, as the windows of both were near the
Warden’s kitchen. “Come with me, and we will try,” said the Master. So
they adjourned to the next Chamber, the boy taking good care to keep his
sleeve, in which was the duck, in close proximity to his conductor, who,
after sniffing about, found, to his surprise, that there really was a
similar flavour there also, which clearly, in that case, could not have
proceeded from any cooking in the room, as there was no fire; and so the
original destiny of the duck was ultimately accomplished.

At the end of the half year, we used to have large entertainments, called
“Spree Messes,” between Toy-time and Chapel, consisting of tea, coffee,
muffins, cakes, &c., the funds for which were generally provided by fines
inflicted during Toy-time for talking loud, slamming the door, coming in
without whistling, (to show that it was not a Master entering,) improper
language, &c. &c. Sometimes a Spree Mess was given by the boys about to
leave at the end of that half. My muffin-consuming power, though still
vigorous, has never been properly developed since the last of these
entertainments at which I assisted, when Rasper, Sower, and myself, were
the joint entertainers.

We brought one half year to a grand conclusion with theatricals in
Seventh. Our preparations we had to make on the sly, as we thought it
probable that, if the authorities were to hear of our proceedings, they
would put a stop to them altogether; however, whether they knew of it or
not, they never interfered, and it came off with great _éclat_. After
considerable debate, the pieces selected were “The Children in the
Wood,” and “Alfred.” We formed our stage by removing all the bedding
from the beds on one side of Chamber, and laying the bed-boards[4] on
them for a floor. A cord was fastened across the room a few feet from
the wall, from which lengths of paper-hangings were suspended to give
it some appearance of a room, and (the toys being removed) to give room
for the actors to pass from one side to the other without being seen by
the audience; in front of all a green drop, or rather draw-curtain, was
suspended.

[Illustration: THE PLAY IN SEVENTH.]

I have but a vague recollection of the plot of the first piece; but I
remember that the _prima donna_ was nearly six feet high. Her figure was
not quite so well suited to the part as her head, and she was obliged to
wear an ample shawl to conceal some little irregularities in her costume
behind. I was a ruffian myself, and, after a sanguinary combat, was slain
by somebody who objected to my cutting the throats of the children. It
were as well the ruffian was killed, as I had to appear as a drunken
servant in the second act; and I fancy that I cut rather a distinguished
appearance in a pair of Mr Oades’s (the butcher) top-boots, which he
kindly lent me for this particular occasion. The scene was supposed to
be a wood; and to convey this idea to the audience, two faggots were
put upon the stage. In this scene I was, in my turn, attacked by two
ruffians, and, snatching a stick from a faggot, proceeded to defend
myself. Somehow or other we all got entangled in my extempore weapon; and
a bed-board giving way in the heat of the struggle, we all disappeared
from the sight of the astonished audience. Just at this moment, in rushed
the gentleman who had killed me in the first act, but whose duty it was
now to defend me with the heroic cry, “What! two to one!” and there is
no knowing what he might not have done if there had been any one for him
to operate on; as it was, he had the stage to himself, and the curtain
was drawn amid roars of laughter. How it all ended, I forget exactly; but
it was no tragedy, and the children ultimately came in for ten thousand
a-year, or were found to be heirs to a dukedom, or something pleasant of
that kind.

The after piece, “Alfred,” was performed in the front of the great
fireplace, where the king could toast his cakes conveniently. He was
wrapped up in a surplice; but underneath he was very gorgeously got up,
in a gold helmet, striped Jersey, tight drawers, and Wellington boots,
with a large silk banner pinned on to his royal shoulders.

If our acting was indifferent, and the scenery and decorations absurd,
they, at any rate, had the desired effect of amusing the audience, to
judge by the tremendous applause that greeted the conclusion. Three
times was the fair and blushing Podina led across the stage, trembling
with modesty and excitement, to receive the enthusiastic applause
of the enraptured spectators. However, I believe the actors had the
best fun after all. Since then, I have assisted at getting up similar
entertainments, but have never enjoyed anything of the kind nearly so
much as this our first and, I believe, the last attempt at theatricals at
Winchester.[5]




[Illustration]




CHAPTER VI.

THE JUNIOR IN HALL.

    Rush for Trenchers, &c.—Description of Hall—Toasting and
    Cooking—Receipt for Fried Potatoes—Tea—Luncheon—Conning for
    Bands—Beever Time—Dinner—Dispars—Fagging in Hall—Kitchen.


At a quarter before nine the door of Seventh chamber passage was
opened, and the boys, eager for breakfast, tumultuously rushed out from
school-court; stopping at the bottom of Hall stairs for a moment, to see
if Poole, the porter, had letters, or, what was even more delightful, a
“Cargo,” (a hamper of game or eatables from home,) for them, and then
darted up the steps.

Before entering, I must give the reader an idea of the internal
arrangement of the noble old Hall, which in beauty and size excels most
of the college halls in Oxford or Cambridge. At the east end is a raised
dais, on which is the “High table,” where the Dons dine in Election week.
Along each side are rows of tables. Those on the north side, allotted to
the Præfects, were called, “Tub, Middle, and Junior Mess,” respectively.
The others, when occupied, being each presided over by a Candlekeeper,
were called respectively senior, second, and so on to junior “End.”
The fireplace is in the centre of the Hall, with two grates looking
in opposite directions, the smoke being conducted away by a chimney
underneath the floor; the whole apparatus, however, is cleared away in
summer time. A screen at the lower end forms a passage, into which opened
“Whiteman’s Hatch,” where “Trenchers,” knives and forks; “Dear’s,” where
bread and cheese; and “Colson’s,” where beer, butter, and salt were
dispensed. The trenchers were about a foot square, and did duty as plates
at all meals; they were admirably adapted for bread and butter, but were
not particularly convenient for those who were partial to hot meat and
gravy. In front of the screen stood “Tub,” from which the Præfect of that
Ilk took his title; it was a strong painted oak chest, with a lid, about
two feet high; its use will be presently described. The great doors at
the top of hall stairs were made fast by a massive oak beam, which was
thrust back into a hole in the thickness of the wall when the doors were
open.

What a rush that used to be up the old stairs; in an instant the
half-doors of the hatches were closed up with a throng of excited
breakfast fags, clambering on each other’s backs, and shouting,
“Robinson, Jones, my own,” which being interpreted means a demand for
trenchers and knives for his masters (some Præfect and Candlekeeper) and
for the applicant himself; he being expected to provide two for each
of the former, (if he only produced one, it would probably be used to
test his descent from the founder,) “his own” were generally ethereal.
The crowd and excitement were much greater at this than at either of
the other hatches, inasmuch as the supply of trenchers and knives was
limited, the latter especially, as they were found (and still oftener
lost) by the boys themselves; whereas at the others, the supply of
eatables was always certain.

Having secured his master’s trenchers, knife and fork, and bread and
butter, the fag had to run down to Conduit to clean the butter, which was
done by battering it against the trencher with a knife under a stream
of water. This was easy enough in warm weather; but when cold it was a
rather heart-breaking operation, as the butter then persisted in breaking
up into crumbs, and rolling about the pavement. The butter washed, then
came the toasting; the grates were spacious, but still not large enough
for the crowd of toasters, especially as the four corners were occupied
each by a boy engaged in frying or grilling potatoes, kidneys, bacon, or
some other viands.

[Illustration: BREAKFAST IN HALL.]

What acres of toast I have made at that fire! We had not proper toasting
forks, but pieces of stick, called “Long Forks,” on which it was
difficult to keep the toast, especially as it was always necessary
to have at least one eye fixed on the batch already done, or awaiting
the operation,—in either case generally placed against the edge of the
fender; if your eye wandered for a minute, a dexterous lunge from some
predacious long-fork transfixed the fruit of all your toil.

    “Sic vos non vobis,” &c.

But I must not moralise too much on this iniquity, my own house being
built somewhat after the fashion of the Crystal Palace.

Besides the toasting, there was cooking to be done; this was generally
confined to frying and grilling, at which we used to be tolerable
proficients; and I have often found this and other little accomplishments
that I picked up in my Fagging experiences, useful in a somewhat varied
after-life. We had a particular way of frying potatoes, which, to
my taste, is superior to any other mode of dressing that invaluable
vegetable.

I will give the receipt:—Take a dish of perfectly plain mashed potatoes,
(we used always to use those that had been boiled the day previous,) put
them on the fire in a frying-pan, with just sufficient butter to prevent
them from sticking to its sides, and a little salt and pepper; keep
stirring them about with a knife till they begin to darken in colour,
then put them up with a knife into a cake, like a very thick omelette;
fry till the lower side becomes a rich brown, then toss it over in the
air; fry the other side in a similar manner, and serve up.

Mother Maskell, the worthy old nurse at Sick-House, used to preside over
the tea department; and as the distance from Hall to Kitchen and back was
at least a quarter of a mile, the breakfast fags had a lively time of it,
and were not altogether sorry when middle school began at ten o’clock.

At one P.M. Hall was opened again, and a repast of boiled beef or
pudding, with bread and cheese and beer, was served; the attendance on a
fine day was generally limited to the grace singers, and the Præfect of
Hall or Tub. The joints at the Præfects’ messes were generally kept for
them, and the beef at the Ends given away. The puddings were usually
preserved for Commoner friends; for, by a curious dispensation, they
preferred the College puddings to their own, and we theirs to ours; so
an exchange was generally effected: they decidedly had the best of the
bargain, as we had pudding three times a week, and they only on Sundays.
At grace time all the boys who were present at this meal, stood up on the
dais on top of Hall, and the senior Præfect present used to go round with
a cricket ball in his hand, and inspect their neckcloths to see whether
or not they had their bands attached, the defaulters receiving three or
four smart blows on the head (“conns”) with the ball, by way of reminder.

In summer time we were let out of afternoon school for a short time about
four P.M., when there was a slight refection of bread and cheese laid out
in Hall. It was called “Beever-time,” and the pieces of bread “Beevers.”

I now come to the crying evil of the times I write of, and of which I
am happy to say I had but a slight experience, as during my time the
whole system was entirely changed. The evil that I speak of, is the way
in which the dinner was managed. All the other little discomforts that
I may have undergone as a Junior, seem luxurious pleasures when I think
of that infernal dinner hour. This meal took place at _six_ o’clock P.M.
in College, (in Commoners’ it was at _one_;) it was ample in quantity,
and excellent in quality. That of the Præfects was nicely served up in
joints, that of the Inferiors was divided into portions, (“Dispars;”)
there were, if I remember rightly, six of these to a shoulder, and eight
to a leg of mutton, the other joints being divided in like proportion.
All these “Dispars” had different names; the thick slice out of the
centre of the leg was called “a Middle Cut,” that out of the shoulder a
“Fleshy,” the ribs “Racks,” the loin “Long Dispars;” these were the best,
the more indifferent were the end of the shoulder, or “Cat’s head,” the
breast, or “Fat Flab,” &c., &c.

On Sundays we had beef, except for six weeks at Easter, when we had
veal. Potatoes were served up in pewter dishes, (“Gomers;”) they were
not very good hot, and the Candlekeeper generally took possession of
those served at his End, and had them kept till the next day for frying,
as above described. Each End and Præfect’s mess had their beer served
up in a large white jug, or “Bob.” The vessel used for the same purpose
in Commoners was called a “Joram.” There was nothing to complain of in
the dinner, though it would have been pleasanter if the meat had been
served in joints instead of lumps, and if we had had plates instead of
trenchers to eat it off; however, to the twenty Juniors at any rate, it
was of very slight importance whether the dinner was comfortably served
or not, as they seldom got any. The distribution was managed as follows:
one of the cooks, escorted by the Præfect of Tub, brought up an immense
tray, with a mountain of meat on it; this was taken first to the senior
Candlekeeper’s end, and then to the others in succession. But only those
boys who were at the End at the time it was brought were permitted to
take their dinners, except the Candlekeepers, who were allowed to have
theirs taken by proxy. As will be seen, it was simply impossible for the
Juniors to be up to time, the consequence of which was that more than
half the dinners were not taken; these were thrown into “Tub” at the end
of Hall, whence they were ultimately taken away by some poor women, and
I always understood, (though I am not certain that such was the case,)
that the “Præfect of Tub” got a certain sum for each “Dispar” not taken,
and so had a direct interest in managing that as many as possible should
go without their dinner. I will now explain the absence of the Juniors;
immediately the Præfects were seated, the whole Hall resounded with
shouts of “Junior—_Junior_—JUNIOR,” rising in savageness of tone, as the
supply became exhausted; in five minutes all the Juniors were darting
wildly about in all directions, executing orders received from their
lords and masters; some to Colson’s hatch for salt, or down into cellar
for beer, back to school for something forgotten, into chambers for a
pint cup, down to kitchen for gravy, &c., &c. In the centre of Hall stood
the senior Candlekeeper and Deputy, each armed with a long and supple
ground ash, their business being to continue hitting every one who came
within reach, so that it was absolutely necessary for every boy passing
down Hall to run the gauntlet of one or the other; the only conceivable
reason for this extraordinary arrangement being, I imagine, that in order
to escape the sticks of the flagellators, the Fags dashed past them as
fast as they could, and so got through what they had to do quicker. To
escape this purgatory I have known boys lie underneath the beer butts in
cellar during the whole of Hall time, and once a wretched fugitive was
discovered hidden in the salt tub, into which he had managed to creep,
and had let the lid down over himself afterwards. Happy the Junior who
was “teejèed” by any Præfect, as he not unfrequently was presented by him
with a plate of meat, or the remains of the joint, (called “a Mess,”) in
which case he was exempt from Fagging as long as he was eating it, and
it was extraordinary how difficult it became to pick a bone, and how long
a small slice of meat could be made to last under such circumstances.
Knives and forks being rare articles with the Juniors, we had some
difficulty in getting rid of a dinner when given to us, unless the
Præfect was good enough also to lend his implements. I remember seeing
Skith with one end of a carcase of a hare in each hand, burrowing among
the ribs with his nose and mouth in search of the tit-bits, which, to
judge by the delight depicted on his countenance, were still remaining.

But let us escape from the din of Hall, and pay a visit to Kitchen. In
the way we pass through “Ante-kitchen,” where is the familiar picture of
the “Trusty Servant.”

[Illustration: THE TRUSTY SERVANT.

    Effigiem servi si vis spectare probati,
      Quisquis es, hæc oculos pascat imago tuos;
    Porcinum os quocunque cibo jejunia sedat;
      Hæc sera, consilium ne fluat, arcta premit.
    Dat patientem asinus dominis jurgantibus aurem;
      Cervus habet celeres ire, redire pedes.
    Læva docet multum, tot rebus onusta, laborem;
      Vestis munditiem, dextera aperta fidem.
    Accinctus gladio, clypeo munitus; et indè
      Vel se, vel dominum, quo tueatur, habet.

    “A trusty servant’s portrait would you see,
    This figure well survey, whoe’er you be;
    The porker’s snout not nice in diet shows;
    The padlock shut, no secret he’ll disclose.
    Patient, to angry lords the ass gives ear;
    Swiftness on errand the stag’s feet declare;
    Laden his left hand, apt to labour saith;
    The coat, his neatness; the open hand, his faith:
    Girt with his sword, his shield upon his arm,
    Himself and master he’ll protect from harm.”]

Here may generally be seen a row of huge leather jugs about two feet
high, (“Jacks,”) made of hippopotamus hide, and peculiar to Winchester,
I believe; at any rate, a relative of mine who lived in one of the
midland counties purchased a pair here every year, and he used to give me
the commission, which I had the greatest pleasure in executing, as he
always sent me a five-pound note to pay for them with, and could never be
induced to take any change.

The Kitchen is a spacious apartment with a vaulted roof, occupying the
entire height of the building on the west side of the quadrangle, and
at least half its length; here we might see a few Fags endeavouring
to coax Jem Sims, John Coward, Bill Bright, or mother Mariner, (the
cooks,) for an extra supply of mashed potatoes, till Kitchen is cleared
by the exasperated Manciple, who has just detected a delinquent in the
act of secreting under his gown an armful of the small faggots used for
lighting the kitchen fires, (called “Bill Brighters,”) an opportunity
for purloining which was never allowed to slip by a Junior of a properly
regulated mind.

It may be asked how the Fags managed to dine at all, and it would be
difficult to answer; but somehow or other we did manage to eat at
odd times, and plenty too, I suppose; at any rate we were always in
excellent condition; there was ample food supplied by College, the
opportunity of eating it only failed. The entire system is now completely
changed; the boys dine at one o’clock, their dinner is as plentiful as
ever, and properly served, with good cookery, plates, and knives and
forks, and no Fagging whatever is allowed, the Choristers waiting, and a
Master being present.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]




CHAPTER VII.

THE JUNIOR IN CHAPEL.

    The Late Warden—The Antechapel—The Crimean Memorial—The New
    Tower—Hours of Service—The Oath—Cloisters.


Let us tread more gently as we pass through the gates of the beautiful
chapel. Here at any rate our Junior finds some rest and quiet, and is for
a period beyond the reach of the weary call of “Junior, Junior.” I feel
that it is a subject that cannot worthily be treated of by my trivial
pen. The most indifferent stranger cannot enter its sacred precincts
without being struck by the air of peaceful solemnity that pervades it
throughout; how much more, then, must he be affected who revisits,
for the first time after many years, the spot where as a boy he so
often listened to the swelling tones of the organ, or eloquent words of
wisdom—often, alas! but too little heeded! What crowds of reflections are
called forth as he gazes on the scene! How many resolutions have here
been formed, and how have they been kept? Can he flatter himself that
he is really more advanced on the narrow path than when he sat on those
benches years and years ago?

I will not attempt to describe the edifice. Let the reader imagine a
noble choir lighted with large windows of rich painted glass, through
which the slanting rays of the sun throw a many-coloured glow over the
wainscot and stalls of polished oak. How well I know every feature of
those quaint figures of prophets and apostles; and as I sit in my stall
and see the boys trooping in, it is difficult to realise that I am no
longer one of them.

But time has made many changes in the upper ranks; the clear ring of
the melodious tones of the accomplished Head-master’s voice may still
be heard, but he alone remains. In vain we look for the stalwart form
and genial countenance of the late beloved Warden, Barter, who, having
filled his responsible office full thirty years, has gone to his rest.
In the long list of his predecessors there has been none who was more
universally beloved in life, and whose death has been more unfeignedly
regretted.

On our way from Chapel we pass through Antechapel, now somewhat curtailed
in its dimensions, the screen which separates it from Chapel having
been moved in order to give room for the increased number of boys. The
beautiful font, presented by the Head-master, and some mural tablets,
(which formerly stood beneath the Tower,) have been removed to a small
side chapel, the entrance to which is under the organ; one of these,
erected to the memory of a young and lovely wife by her sorrowing
husband, bears the following beautiful inscription:—

    “I nimium dilecta, vocat Deus, I bona nostræ”
    “Pars animæ, mærens altera disce sequi.”

In the vestibule leading to Cloisters, immediately opposite to the door
of Antechapel, is the memorial erected by Wykehamists in memory of their
brethren who fell in the Crimean war; it is worthy of its object, being
beautifully executed in variegated marble. I have stood by their graves
in the dreary Russian Chersonese, yet it seems but yesterday that I heard
some of them answering their names at this very door.

[Illustration: THE CRIMEAN MEMORIAL.

INSCRIPTION ON THE CRIMEAN MEMORIAL.

Samuel Twyford R.N. Lieutenant H.M.S. London. Killed in the Trenches
while serving in the Royal Naval Brigade 9th April 1855 aged 25 years.

Edward Henry Webb. Lieutenant 88th Connaught Rangers. Killed in the
attack on the Quarries 7th June 1855 aged 22 years.

Frederick Grote Barker. Lieutenant 68th Light Infantry. Killed at the
Battle of Inkerman 5th November 1854 aged 21 years.

Richard Grenville Deane. Ensign 30th Regiment of Foot. Killed at the
assault on the Redan 5th Sept 1855 aged 18 years.

Walter Trevelyan. Colonel Coldstream Guards. Died of Cholera at Varna
21st August 1854 aged 56 years.

Robert Edward Boyle M.P. Son of Edmund Earl of Cork and Orrery. Lieut.
Colonel Coldstream Guards. Died of Fever at Varna 3d September 1854 aged
44 years.

Henry Thomas Butler. Captain 55th Regiment of Foot Deputy Assistant
Adjutant General. Killed at the Battle of Inkerman 5th November 1854 aged
41 years.

THIS PORCH Has been prepared and beautified by WILLIAM of WYKEHAMS Sons
as a sacred shrine in which the memories of their thirteen brethren who
died in the War of the Crimea A.D. 1854-5 may be preserved for an example
to future generations. Think upon them thou who art passing by to day.
Child of the same family bought by the same Lord. Keep thy foot when thou
goest into this house of God. There watch thine armour and make thyself
ready by prayer. To fight and to die. The faithful soldier and servant of
Christ. And of thy Country.

John Jackson Lowth C.B. Lieut Colonel 38th Regiment of Foot. Died on
landing at Portsmouth 28th July 1855. From wounds received on the 18th
June aged 51 years.

John Charles Conolly. Captain 23d Royal Welsh Fusiliers. Killed at the
Battle of the Alma 20th September 1854 aged 33 years.

Frank John Curtis. Lieutenant 46th Regiment of Foot. Killed in the
Trenches 23d May 1855 aged 23 years.

Arthur Francis Main. Lieutenant 77th Regiment of Foot. Died in camp 21st
November 1854 aged 22 years.

James Bullen Dennis. Lieutenant 3d Buffs. Died 4th October 1855 of wounds
received in the trenches before Sebastopol 19th August 1855 aged 21 years.

Charles Henry Beck. Lieutenant 23d Royal Welsh Fusiliers. Died at sea 23d
September 1855 of wounds received at the assault on the Redan aged 19
years.

HE IS NOT A GOD OF THE DEAD BUT OF THE LIVING FOR ALL LIVE TO HIM.]

The beautiful Tower attached to the Chapel had long been in rather a
dilapidated condition, owing to its having been built on a very insecure
foundation; it had inclined considerably to one side, a great crack had
appeared on the contiguous wall of Chapel, which indeed it threatened to
drag down, and it was considered unsafe to ring the bells. For these
reasons the authorities determined to pull it down and rebuild it, stone
for stone, with the old materials; this was commenced in 1860, and the
work is now fully completed. It is called the “Tower of the Two Wardens,”
in memory of the late Dr Williams, who was (many years Head-master of
Winchester, and afterwards) Warden of New College, Oxford, and of Mr
Barter, the late Warden of Winchester; while the work of reconstruction
was going on, the opportunity was seized of enlarging the chapel by
taking in part of the Antechapel, as described in a previous page. If
the school continues to increase as it has done lately, this enlargement
must, I think, be carried on further, and the whole of Antechapel be
added to the main aisle. Beneath the Tower, on the southern side of the
Antechapel, is the following inscription:—

                              In Memoriam,
                        DAVID WILLIAMS, I.C.D.,
                             HUJUS COLLEGII
                XIV. ANNOS HOSTIARII: XII. INFORMATORIS
                       COLL. B.M. WINTON IN OXON
                          XX. ANNOS CUSTODIS,
                   VIRI CONSILIO DIGNITATE DOCTRINÂ,
                        HUMANITATE MUNIFICENTIA,
                  CANDORE MORUM, ET INTEGRITATE VITÆ,
                        SI QUIS ALIUS INSIGNIS.

                              In Memoriam,
                        ROBERT SPECKOTT BARTER,
                                I.C.B.,
                             HUJUS COLLEGII
                         XXIX. ANNOS CUSTODIS,
                                  VIRI
                 OB BENEVOLENTIAM CORDIS ET LARGITATEM
                      CONSTANTIAM ANIMI ET FIDEM,
                   SUAVITATEM LIBERALITATEM PIETATEM,
                          NEMINI NON DILECTUM.

  Utriusque geminorum horum Collegiorum decoris tutelæ columnæ
    Utriusque intra unius anni spatium ad immortalia avocati
  Hanc Turrim vetustate diu labantem denuo exædificandam, ab nomine Duorum
      Custodum
    Perpetuo appellandum censuerunt Wiccamici sui A.S. MDCCCLXIII.
      posterorum causa
  Id scilicet in animis habentes ut in ipsa acerbissimi desiderii
      recordatione manifestum facerent
    Non in quibuslibet viris magnis nec in brevem aliquam hominum ætatem
      Sed in omne tempus et in perpetua serie virorum ad horum exemplar
      Sub his penetralibus ad omnia bona fortia fidelia enutriendorum

    STARE REM WICCAMICAM.

The hours of worship (now, I believe, somewhat altered) used to be as
follows:—At six A.M. in summer, at a quarter before seven in winter,
at eight and at half-past ten A.M., and at five P.M., on Sundays,[6]
Saints’-days, and Founder’s Anniversaries. On Fridays at eleven A.M., and
on Saturdays at five P.M. the boys might be seen trooping across the
quadrangle on their way to Chapel—on Sundays and on Saints’-days clad
in white surplices. Besides this, every evening at nine prayers used to
be read by the junior Præfect in Antechapel, who stood on the top of
the steps leading up to one of the curtained and barred pews reserved
for ladies, one of which was placed on each side of Antechapel; the
fair occupants, not being allowed to enter the body of the chapel, were
obliged to content themselves with looking and listening through the
grating.

Once a year all the boys who had passed the age of fifteen, (and who
had not previously gone through the same ceremony,) were marshalled
into Chapel, and, under the inspection of “Semper Testis,” (the legal
aide-de-camp of the College authorities,) went through the form of taking
an oath. I have no distinct recollection of the form of the proceeding,
(it is now abolished,) but I think the official above-mentioned read out
a Latin document, and we were supposed to say Amen. I believe the gist of
it was that we were to defend and befriend the college to the best of
our ability, and never tell anybody what went on within its walls. I am
sure I should require no compulsion to carry out the former obligation,
should the occasion occur, and I had any possible means of fulfilling my
duty, and if I have done no more harm in writing this little sketch of
our proceedings at Winchester than infringing the latter, my conscience
will not be much troubled. Although the making a number of thoughtless
boys go through a ceremony of this kind may seem objectionable, yet it is
not the part of a Wykehamist to exclaim against it, as, according to well
authenticated tradition, Cromwell would have destroyed the College, had
he not yielded to the urgent representations of one of his officers, who
was a Wykehamist, and, mindful of his oath, succeeded in saving the noble
establishment from its impending fate.

I must not take leave of Chapel without noticing the beautiful Cloisters,
with a little gem of a chapel standing in the middle, surrounded by
smooth green turf. It is now used as the Fellows’ library. I think it a
pity that the Cloisters are so little seen, as they are very beautiful.
The Fellows, in general, do not reside at Winchester, and I do not
imagine that those who do spend any very great part of their time in such
absorbing study that the movements of the Præfects in Cloisters on week
days, and of the others on Sundays, would disturb them very much; to such
an extent I think the boys might be admitted without danger of their
injuring the building or the tablets on the walls. At present the extreme
stillness of the place is somewhat overpowering.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]




CHAPTER VIII.

THE JUNIOR IN SCHOOL.

    Description of School—Scobs—Officers—Division of Classes—Prizes
    and Medals—Long and Short Half—Easter Time—Commoners’
    Speaking—Cloisters—Latin Composition—Flogging—Scraping and
    Shirking Out—Latin Verses—Pealing.


On descending Hall stairs, and turning sharp to the right through Seventh
Chamber passage, we enter School Court. The School is a spacious edifice,
(built in 1687,) ninety feet long, and thirty-six broad; it may be a
handsome building by itself, but, like the adjacent Commoners, is not
favourably contrasted with the venerable Gothic buildings of the College,
of which they form part. In the south-west corner of School is the
Throne of the Head, and, in the south-east, that of the Second Master;
opposite to each are seats for the Under-Masters.

At each end of School are three tiers of benches rising gradually one
above the other,—that on the ground being called “Senior Row,” and the
others “Middle” and “Junior Row” respectively. On these the classes
sit when “up at books,”—_i.e._, when repeating lessons,—four parallel
double ranges of solid oak benches, intersected, at intervals of about
four feet, by others, and firmly fixed to the floor, run from end to
end of the room, except where broken by Commoners’ tables, (two tables,
at which there is room for about thirty Commoners; the rest get places
where they can,) by the fireplace, and the passage from it to the door;
between these rows of benches are three broad passages down School. On
every angle of these intersecting forms is placed a large oak box, with
a double lid. Every College boy, and some Commoner Præfects, had one of
these; and some of the Senior Præfects have four, others three, and the
rest two. One of the lids of these boxes was generally kept up during
School-time to ensure a certain degree of privacy to the occupant, the
lower lid doing duty as a table; inside were kept the books and other
belongings of the proprietor. They were called “Scobs,”—_i.e._, box
phonetically spelt backwards.

High up on the wall, at the west end of the School, is a large tablet,
with a mitre, crosier, sword, inkstand, and rod painted on it, with the
words—

            “Aut disce, aut discede, manet sors tertia cædi;”

which has been freely rendered—

                       “Work, walk, or be whopped.”

At the opposite end of School is another large tablet, on which is
painted the

                      “Tabula legum Pædagogicarum,”

which gives the rules to be observed by the boys in Chapel, School, Hall,
Quadrangle, Chambers, On Hills, and in All Places and Times.

[Illustration: TABULA LEGUM PÆDAGOGICARUM.

_IN TEMPLO._—DEUS COLITOR. PRECES CUM _PIO_ [DEVOTO _in the ancient and
original version_] ANIMI AFFECTU PERAGUNTOR. OCULI NE VAGANTOR. SILENTIUM
ESTO. NIHIL PROFANUM LEGITOR.

_IN SCHOLÂ._—DILIGENTIÂ QUISQUE UTITOR. SUBMISSÈ LOQUITOR SECUM. CLARÈ
AD PRÆCEPTOREM. NEMINI MOLESTUS ESTO. ORTHOGRAPHICÈ SCRIBITO. ARMA
SCHOLASTICA IN PROMPTU SEMPER HABETO.

_IN AULÂ._—QUI MENSAS [MENSAM, _orig._] CONSECRAT CLARÈ PRONUNCIATO.
CÆTERI RESPONDENTO. RECTI _INTERIM_ [_in the original draught omitted_]
OMNES STANTO. RECITATIONES INTELLIGENTER ET APTÈ DISTINGUUNTOR. AD MENSAS
[QUIES ESTO, _orig._] SEDENTIBUS OMNIA DECORA SUNTO.

_IN ATRIO._—_NE QUIS FENESTRAS SAXIS PILISVE PETITO. ÆDIFICIUM NEVE
INSCRIBENDO NEVE INSCULPENDO DEFORMATO. NEVE OPERTO CAPITE NEVE SINE
SOCIO CORAM MAGISTRO INCEDITO_ [_omitted in the original_.]

_IN CUBICULIS._—MUNDA OMNIA SUNTO. VESPERE STUDETOR. _NOCTU QUIES ESTO_
[_omitted in the original; instead of these injunctions occurs this law_:
NOCTU DORMITOR, INTERDIÙ STUDETOR. SOLUM CUBICULORUM VERRITOR. STERNUNTOR
LECTULI. PER FENESTRAS NEMO IN ATRIUM PROSPICITO. CONTRÀ QUI FAXIT,
PIACULUM ESTO.]

_IN OPPIDO, AD MONTEM._—SOCIATI OMNES INCEDUNTO. MODESTIAM PRÆ SE
FERUNTO. MAGISTRIS AC OBVIIS HONESTIORIBUS [GENUA FLECTUNTOR, _in
original_] CAPITA APERIUNTOR, VULTUS, GESTUS, INCESSUS COMPONUNTOR.
INTRA TERMINOS APUD MONTEM PRÆSCRIPTOS QUISQUE SE CONTINETO [_omitted in
original_].

_IN OMNI LOCO ET TEMPORE._—QUI PLEBEIUS EST, PRÆFECTIS OBTEMPERATO. QUI
PRÆFECTUS EST LEGITIME IMPERATO. _IS ORDO VITIO CARETO: CÆTERIS SPECIMÈN
ESTO_ [_omitted in original_]. _UTERQUE À PRAVIS OMNIBUS VERBISQUE
FACTISQUE_ [MENDACIIS, OSTENTATIONIBUS, JURGIIS, PUGNIS, ET FURTIS, _in
orig._] ABSTINETO. [TOGAM CÆTERASQUE VESTES, NEC DISSUITO, NEC LACERATO.
PATRIUM SERMONEM FUGITO, LATINUM EXERCETO, _in orig._] HÆC AUT HIS
SIMILIA _QUI CONTRA FAXIT_ [_omitted in original_], SI QUANDÒ DEFERANTUR,
JUDICIA DAMUS. _FERIIS EXACTIS NEMO DOMI IMPUNÈ MORATUR. EXTRA COLLEGIUM
ABSQUE VENIÁ EXEUNTES TERTIA VICE EXPELLIMUS_ [_omitted in orig._]]

School hours, in the times I write of, were from eight to nine A.M.,
(Morning School,) from ten to twelve, (Middle School,) and from two till
six P.M., (Evening School;) at the close of which prayers were read by
the Præfect of School.

On “Remedies,” (a kind of whole holiday,) we also went into School in
the morning and afternoon for an hour or two without masters; this was
called Books Chambers; and on Sundays, from four till a quarter to five.
In “Cloister Time,” (_v.i._,) Præfects, and senior part of the Fifth,
went into School on Sundays from seven to eight, which period was called
“Grotius Time.”

Order was kept during School hours by the Bible Clerk and Ostiarius, two
of the Præfects, who held these offices in rotation,—the former lasting
for a week, the latter for one day only. They paraded School armed with
sticks, and brought up to the Head and Second Masters (who alone had the
power of flogging) the names of the delinquents which had been “ordered”
for punishment; the names of the more heinous offenders being confided
to the Bible Clerk, the others to the Ostiarius. Just before School-time,
a boy was always stationed to watch the arrival of the Master, of which
he had to give notice by emitting a loud “Hiss,” upon which there was a
general rush up to books; the previous uproar dwindled to a calm, and
work began.

The School was divided into three classes, or “Books,” as they were
called. Of these the Præfects formed one, “Sixth Book:” “Fifth Book”
was subdivided into three parts, called respectively “Senior, Middle,
and Junior part of the Fifth;” in speaking of them, the words “of the
Fifth” were generally omitted. The rest of the boys made up “Fourth
Book;” their instruction, however, was not carried on in School, but in
another building adjoining, where the Præfects had a library, and in
which the mathematics were taught. The Præfects and senior part did not
change places from day to day, but only at the final examination in
Election-week. In the other parts, the relative positions of the boys
continually fluctuated, and their numbers were marked every day, at the
beginning of Middle School, in a book called the “Classicus (or Cuse)
Paper:” the individual who had the greatest number by the end of the
half year “got the books,” (_i.e._, gained a prize.) These books were
supposed to be given by the late Duke of Buckingham; now, I believe,
they are really given by Lord Saye and Sele. The boy who had the lowest
score at the end of any week, held the office of “Classicus” for the
week following,—his duties being always to inform the other boys what
was the particular lesson for the day, and what was the subject for
the next vulgus verse or prose task. There were two gold medals for
Composition,—for Latin verse and English prose, and for English verse and
Latin prose, on alternate years; and two silver for Elocution, annually
competed for; besides prizes given by Maltby, Bishop of Durham, for Greek
verse, Latin verse, and Inferiors’ speaking; Sir William Heathcote, of
Hursley, for Scholarship; and Mr Duncan, for Mathematics.

The School year was divided into two unequal parts. One, called “Short
Half,” commenced about the beginning of September, and lasted till about
the middle of December; the other, “Long Half,” from the beginning
of February till the middle of July. The six weeks after Easter
(“Easter-Time”) were devoted to the study of Greek Grammar, and once in
each of these weeks there was competition in speaking, the best speakers
being selected to display their oratorical powers on the final day, which
was called “Commoners’ Speaking.” During the remaining weeks of Long
Half, (“Cloister Time,”) Sixth Book and Senior part went up to books
together; when thus combined, they were called “Pulpiteers.” Middle and
Junior part were merged together in the same way—those in Junior part
having the opportunity of rising into Middle part, and _vice versâ_.
This combination was called “Cloisters,” and this period of the year
“Cloister Time;” the distinguished post of “Cloister Classicus” was, I
can tell from long experience, by no means a sinecure.

Efficiency in Latin composition, especially verse, and learning lines
by heart, were (unfortunately for me) the surest means of rising in the
School. Four days a week we had to write a short copy of verses of from
four to six lines on a set subject; this was called a “Vulgus,” and was
always written on half a quarter of a sheet of foolscap, (“a Vessel of
Paper.”) Once a week, one of from ten to twenty, a “Verse Task,” (written
on a quarter of foolscap;) and, once a week, also a “Prose Task.” We
were always excused (“had Remission from”) Vulgus when the next day was
a Saint’s-day; and if one fell on a Wednesday or Friday, our verse or
prose task for the day previous was remitted. Præfects and Senior part
also were encouraged to write, once or twice in the half-year, a copy
of verses on any subject selected by themselves, which was called a
“Voluntary.” From time to time, also, they had to write Latin criticisms
on Greek plays, and the other boys to write an analysis of some
historical work; these productions were called “Gatherings,” (or “Gags.”)
In the last week but one of “Long Half,” all the boys, except those in
Sixth Book and Senior part, had to say a number of lines; this was called
”Standing-up Week,” concerning which and “Election Week,” (the last week
of the same half,) I will treat hereafter.

Flogging was not excessively frequent, and by no means severe. The
rod consisted of a wooden handle about two feet and a half long, with
four grooves at one end, into which were inserted four apple twigs;
these branched off from the handle at so considerable an angle, that
not more than one could touch the space of skin exposed,—about a
hand’s-breadth of the small of the back, the waistcoat of the victim
being raised to the necessary height. To obviate this to a certain
extent, the “Rod-maker”—one of the Juniors charged with the care of
these implements—had to twist them together so as to form one combined
stick; generally, however, they separated after the second cut. I am
told that these twigs are now cut so as to lie in a straight line with
the rod, without any angle, which is a very disadvantageous change
for the floggee. The ordinary punishment consisted of four cuts, and
was called “a Scrubbing.” The individual who was to be punished was
told “to order his name,” which he did by going to the Ostiarius, and
requesting him to do so; that officer accordingly, at the end of School
time, would take his name to the Master, who would then call it out,
and the victim had to kneel down at Senior row, while two Juniors laid
bare the regulation space of his back. The first time a boy’s name was
ordered, the punishment was remitted on his pleading “Primum tempus.” For
a more serious breach of duty, a flogging of six cuts (a “Bibler”) was
administered, in which case the culprit had to “order his name to the
Bible Clerk,” and that individual, with the help of Ostiarius, performed
the office of Jack Ketch. If a boy was detected in a lie, or any very
disgraceful proceeding,—a rare occurrence, I am happy to say,—he had
to stand up in the centre of Junior row during the whole of the School
time, immediately preceding the infliction of the flogging; this pillory
process was called a “Bibler under the nail.” I have also heard, that for
a very heinous offence a boy might be punished in Sixth Chamber, in which
case the number of stripes was not limited; but I never knew an instance
of this.

On one first of April, an impertinent boy undertook to make an April fool
of the Doctor, and accordingly marched boldly up to his throne, and told
him that he had torn his gown; and, on the rent not being found visible
to the naked eye, suggested that it was the 1st of April; upon which
he was told to order his name to the Bible Clerk. When Middle School
was over, the Doctor put on his trencher cap, and called out, “Pincher,
Bible Clerk, and Ostiarius!” (which meant that Pincher was to advance
to receive his deserts, and the others to assist as masters of the
ceremonies.) At the moment that the culprit was expecting to feel the
sting of the apple-twigs across his backbone, the Doctor threw down the
rods, saying, “Who is the fool now?” and was walking out of School, when
the undaunted Pincher jumped up, and ejaculated, “It’s past twelve, Sir!”

Ordinary offences of a trifling character, such as being late for
Chapel, or “Shirking Hills,” (_v.i._,) were punished by the infliction
of an imposition,—generally thirty lines of Virgil, English and Latin.
I think I must have written out the Æneids of Virgil and Odes of Horace
half-a-dozen times during my sojourn at Winchester. Indeed, being
naturally of a prudent disposition, whenever I had nothing particular to
do, I used to write out a few lines, and thus gradually became possessed
of a small capital of a thousand lines or so, on which I could draw at
any pressing emergency.

If a boy had occasion to speak to a Master, and while he was up at books,
the correct thing was to keep his gown buttoned at the top; and if he
wished to go out of School, he wrote his name on a slip of paper, (or
“Roll,”) with the following sentence:—“Ostiarii veniâ potitus, tuam
pariter exeundi petit;” he then asked leave of the Ostiarius to “put up
his roll,” which being granted, he deposited it on the Master’s desk,
and made his exit. When a Præfect wanted to go out, he went to a corner
Scob near the door, and “scraped” with his feet until he attracted the
Master’s attention, and obtained a nod of consent. At one particular time
of the year, (I think it was during Saturday evening School in Easter
week,) two Commoners and one College Inferior might collectively scrape
out together. Only about half-a-dozen boys were allowed to be out at one
time; but I have known some steal out on the sly, without any preliminary
formality. On a fine summer afternoon, the Doctor might accidentally
cast his eye over School, and observing that it had rather a deserted
expression, would send out the Bible Clerk and Ostiarius to make a foray
in Meads, who would presently return with a flock of truants; it being
impossible to flog such a number, it was usual to make them “cut in a
book,”[7] to settle which half-a-dozen should be distinguished in this
manner.

[Illustration: SCHOOL.]

The educational system at Winchester is, I believe, most excellent,
and turns out a very superior article in many cases. I am sorry that I
cannot point to myself as a brilliant example. When I was in Junior part,
I was under a Master who used to curb my ascending energies by making
me always stand up junior, and not allowing me “to take up” even when
we went up to the Doctor for our monthly examination. He used also to
employ the following method of repressing any little eccentricities on my
part; he would call me up to the side of his desk, and putting his hand
affectionately on my shoulder, mildly remonstrate with me, gradually his
hand would creep up, and a finger entwine itself in the hair above and
a little in front of my ear, and he would impress on me the more salient
points of his lecture by a steady screw of the finger. This treatment
ultimately became very tiresome; so one day, just as the screw-powder was
being laid on, I emitted a yell, that made the Doctor bound again in his
chair, and brought every boy in the school on his legs. After this my
hair was allowed to curl naturally. In the middle of the half year this
Master left, and his place was filled by another. The reader will be as
much surprised as I was, when he hears that at the end of that half I
got the books! If any one doubts the fact, I can show them the volume in
question, with a statement in it endorsed by his Grace the late Duke of
Buckingham, that my morals were excellent, and my habits of application
most praiseworthy. I was accordingly promoted into Middle part, and when
the next half year I proudly ascended to my new position, I had visions
of a fellowship at New College, and a shadowy notion of the woolsack in
futurity. Neither of these fancies, however, have yet been accomplished.
If it were not that owing to the inclemency of the season this autumn,
the grapes are so very backward, I should be inclined to make some
remarks touching the former disappointment.

My new Master unfortunately thought that I was incorrigibly idle, and
in my Latin verses and lines showed me no mercy. I struggled hard for
a year, (oh, the many hours that I have sat up in bed and paced up and
down School, trying to drive the requisite number of lines into my head
for the next morning’s repetition,) and after that his opinion gradually
became more correct. Unfortunately for me, our places were always
marked every morning immediately after the repetition of lines; and as
I invariably went to the bottom then, it mattered little how much I had
risen previously, and I was “Semper (always) Classicus;” and so if I had
remained at Winchester, I should have been to the present day.

I must also admit that I was not strong in Latin verse. I remember
writing a copy once that I thought was beyond criticism, and was much
disgusted when I found that the Master thought that “pius Æneas” was not
a suitable termination to an Hexameter line. I was not, however, alone
in this want of true poetic feeling. My worthy friend Podder one day
produced the following Pentameter:—

                “Lēŏ rĕx bēllŭărūm ūt cæ̆tŭs ēst pĭscĭūm.”

For the benefit both of those who do, and those who do not, understand
Latin, I will mention that the translation of the above was meant to be—

       “The lion is the king of beasts, as the whale is of fishes.”

Will Bumpus forgive me if I relate an instance of his ingenuity? He
quietly took the following line from Horace, and served it up as an
_Hexameter_ of his own composition:—

                 Dūlcē|ēt dē|cōrūm|ēst prō|pātrĭâ|mōrī.|

On the inexpediency of this being suggested to him, he was setting
to work to alter it, when suddenly a bright thought flashed across
his mind; he knew the line was out of Horace, so that if it wasn’t an
Hexameter, it must be a Pentameter; so up it came—

                 Dūlcĕ ĕt|dēcōr|ūm|ēst prŏpă|triă mŏ|rī.

The rest being tragic, I will break off here, and having given the reader
enough of myself and my shortcomings, will proceed to more general
subjects.

We had some singular customs at the commencement of Cloister time. Senior
part and Cloisters, just before the entrance of the Masters into School,
used to engage in a kind of general tournament; this was called “Cloister
Roush;” each party used to charge from their respective ends of School
till they met in the middle; it was a good-humoured affair; fists were
not used, but only wrestling and hustling. Another remarkable custom was
that of “Cloister Pealing.” At the commencement of Cloister time, for a
few minutes before the hiss was given, the vast gulf that usually existed
between Præfects and Inferiors was temporarily broken down. All the
boys in Cloisters being assembled up at books, proceeded to chant the
praises of the popular or severe criticisms on the unpopular, Præfects,
in short Latin, Greek, or English epigrams. I am happy to say that the
complimentary species generally preponderated. Well do I remember the
enthusiasm with which we chanted on one occasion—

    Ζωή μου σᾶς ἀγαπῶ.

Ζωή being the nickname of one of the senior Præfects, _Rich_ in all those
physical and moral qualities that endear an athletic youth to his younger
school-fellows. I might give some examples of Peals, which the reader
might find more amusing than the subjects found them complimentary, but
for obvious reasons I abstain.

In Commoners also there was an entirely different description of
“Pealing,” which will be described in the chapter on Standing up and
Election Week.




[Illustration]




CHAPTER IX.

THE JUNIOR ON A LOCKBACK HOLIDAY.

    Fagging Choristers—Crutch—Currell—Concerts—Fighting—How to
    Catch the Measles—“Books Chambers.”


When the weather was too bad on a Holiday or “Remedy” to go on to Hills,
we used to pass the day principally in school; the gate of Seventh
Chamber passage being locked, and communication with Chamber Court being
cut off, it was called a “Lockback.”

On leaving morning chapel on such a day we adjourned at once to school,
when the Fags would by no means have an idle time of it. The instant
they arrived “Junior! Junior! Junior!” would resound on every side, and
in every conceivable tone of gentle entreaty, slight impatience, and
vehement indignation, according to the temper of the caller, or duration
of the call. Then the valets had to arrange their master’s washing things
on Commoners’ table, for few of the Præfects condescended to wash before
chapel. Others were sent, with all kinds of commissions, to “Blue gate,”
(a door in the west wall of School court, which opened into a side
passage running along the outside of the kitchen buildings, to outer
gate,) which was pierced with a hole about a foot square, through which
the Choristers were called and received their orders, and through which
they handed any articles they might have been sent for; the scene here
was similar to that at Whitesman’s hatch at breakfast time, (_v. s._)
crowds of Fags jostling round the hole and clinging to the bars screaming
“Chorister! Chorister!” at the top of their voices, in frantic eagerness
to catch the eye of the first Chorister, the clatter of whose hobnailed
boots would be heard coming up the flint pavement a long time before the
wearer could be seen. When he did appear the cry was, “Fagging for me;”
or, more generally, instead of “me,” the name of the Præfect for whom the
message was to be sent was used, as more likely to carry weight with the
Chorister.

The little Choristers had hard work of it; they were soon scattered
all over the town,—to La Croix’s for a pint of coffee and twopenn’orth
of biscuits, or a “Tizzy tart;” to Nevy’s (this gentleman supplied
edibles at Commoners’ field; I suppose he once had an uncle or an aunt,
and so got his nickname; if he ever had any other name nobody knew it,
and I doubt if he did himself) for strawberries and cream, or Burney’s
biscuits; to Flight’s for sallyluns; to Forder’s for buns; to Stone’s, to
Drew’s, to Raymond’s for anything you like, besides innumerable errands
to the boot-maker, tailor, circulating library, &c., &c.

One of the most common and disagreeable orders for a Junior to receive
on these wet mornings was to get a pint cup; as at the commencement of
the half year the stock-in-trade for the whole College consisted of
about two dozen, and as they were by no means “College ware,” _i.e._,
not easily broken, in a few weeks they became rather scarce articles,
but no Junior being ever allowed to say he “couldn’t” procure anything
he was told to get, he had to depart on his hopeless errand, and, not
succeeding, receive the usual reward.

As the day wore on some of the Præfects would subside into the
comfortably stuffed seats between their scobs, and set to work “Mugging,”
(reading hard,) only occasionally lifting up their voices to call
“Junior!”: other boys would take to playing chess, or some other quiet
game; while the more noisily disposed would indulge in practising
jumps over the Commoners’ tables, playing Hicockolorum, or Crocketts,
(miniature cricket, with a stump and a fives ball,) to the great
detriment of Præfect of School’s windows.

Presently Seventh Chamber passage would open and admit Crutch, (I
wonder what his name really was,) a knowing-looking little man, whose
occupation was that of surgeon to those cricket and fives bats that had
received severe wounds; and he was such a skilful operator that a bat
always seemed to rise like a Phœnix from its ashes after passing through
his hands; a clamorous crowd would speedily surround the bat-surgeon, to
supply him with fresh patients, or consult him on the constitution of
others. Currell, also, would be likely to come in on a wet day,—when I
say Currell, I mean a hair-cutter, for there were two or three of them,
but whoever the individual was, to the boys he was always “Currell.” One
of them operated on me yesterday; as he was combing my luxuriant locks,
he remarked:—“Hair not quite so thick, sir, as it used to was in the
old times; very fine ’ead of ’air then, sir. Remember when you came,
before New Commoners’ was built; great changes since then. Old Poole
dead at last, sir. Doctor’s nephew is a master now, sir; has an ’ouse in
Kingsgate Street, and takes in young gents,” &c., &c. But I don’t think
he could have told me much more, as I find that having my hair cut is
not nearly so tedious an operation as it used to be.

On the dark afternoons in the short half, for about an hour before hall
time, (six o’clock,) the boys used to assemble round the fire, the
Juniors sitting on the stone steps, and the Præfects on scobs ranged in
a semicircle in front; two large vessels of egg-flip were placed in the
middle, from which the contents were scooped out with pint cups, and we
used to sing lustily, if not well. I trust that the _repertoire_ of songs
has been changed since those days; indeed, before I left all the more
objectionable ones were expunged. We always began with “When good King
Arthur reigned,” and then followed promiscuously “The Bay of Biscay,”
“The Workhouse Boy,” “John Barleycorn,” “Three Jolly Postboys,” “Betsy
Baker,” “Captain Bold,” “The Overseer,” “I Loves a Drop of Good Beer,”
“Fox went Out one Moonshiny Night,” “Tally ho! Hark away,” &c.

[Illustration: EGG-FLIP NIGHT.]

Amongst two hundred boys quarrels would occasionally arise, which were
generally adjusted, when the principals were at all equally matched, by
an appeal to that old British weapon—the Fist. Fights were by no means
exceedingly frequent, and when they did come off, were conducted with all
due solemnity. School on a Lockback day was a very favourite arena, and
differences were also settled on Hills and on “Sicily,” (a triangular
piece of grass just at the entrance into Meads,) where I have also seen
a main of cocks fought. I will not give an account of an ideal fight, as
everybody has already read the particulars of that one so graphically
written by my excellent friend Tom Brown, with whose sentiments on
the subject in general I cordially concur, and I strongly recommend
my readers to take down their copy of the book from its shelf at this
moment, and reperuse that portion of it. To the best of my recollection,
I was only once engaged in a _bonâ fide_ set-to of the kind in question;
but I flatter myself that this was a very remarkable contest, being well
remembered for some little time by the fortunate spectators. We commenced
operations immediately after morning chapel, and did not lay down our
arms till the hiss was given for morning school; we were then squaring-up
for the forty-ninth round. I got my head considerably punched in the
first few rounds, during which indeed it was seldom out of Chancery, but
I improved as we got on, and felt quite sorry when we were obliged to
give up; neither of us, however, had afterwards the slightest anxiety
to renew the engagement, and we always continued the best of friends,
having, from practical experience, learnt mutual respect for each other;
and whenever in after life I have had the pleasure of meeting my old
antagonist, we have never failed in conversation to fight our battle over
again.

A good deal of practice with single stick, foils, and boxing-gloves, went
on in school also; I was one day exercising the latter instruments with
Pudding, when I received a blow in the throat which made me feel very
uncomfortable, and we left off; I got worse and worse, and finally had to
apply for leave from school; I then went down to sick house, was rather
feverish that evening, and awoke next morning with—the Measles.

On “Remedies” from eleven till twelve, and from four till five there
was an attempt at keeping order in school, under the presidence of the
unfortunate French Master, who, I fear, had rather a warm time of it, in
endeavouring, with the assistance of the Bible Clerk and Ostiarius, to
maintain anything like a proper command over us. These hours of mitigated
study were called “Books Chambers.”

[Illustration]




[Illustration]




CHAPTER X.

THE JUNIOR IN MEADS.

    “Watching out”—Cricket Reminiscences—Lord’s
    Matches—Turf—Football—Six and Six—Twenty-two and Twenty-two—SS
    and Trees—Fines—Sick-House—Gooseberry Fool—“Going
    Continent”—Long Meads—Enlargement of Meads.


As I said before, I must confess that as a Junior I did not on the whole
look upon a holiday as a peculiar blessing; indeed I used to watch the
applicant for a Remedy with much interest, and profound was my secret
disgust when it was granted, and ill-concealed my satisfaction if it was
refused.

My reason for this was the unlimited extent to which “Watching out” at
cricket was enforced on us. I believe that this is now altered, the
time being limited to one hour on a school-day, and two on a holiday,
which amount is healthy for the boys, and very useful, inasmuch as it
initiates them into one of the most useful branches of a public-school
education—the science of cricket. But it is quite possible to have too
much of a good thing. I have been, on a Saint’s-day, (this, however, was
an extreme case, and did not occur often,) ordered down to watch out in
Meads early in the morning before breakfast, and not allowed to quit the
ground, (except to attend chapel,) till dark, the whole time without a
hat, often in a broiling sun; at breakfast time and one o’clock one of
the Fags would be sent up to bring down food, which we ate on the ground.
In order to effect this day’s work, we had (if we could not get leave,
and I think only three were allowed) to shirk Hills three times, for each
of which we were liable (if discovered, by names being called, as was
generally the case) to an imposition. And when the day’s entertainment
commenced by a big Præfect, about twenty-two years old, placing a boy
about ten paces behind the wickets as Longstop to a fast bowler,
pointing significantly to a spare stump stuck in the ground close by, and
remarking, with a savage scowl, “Now, you look here, you young ⸺, you see
that stump, the first ball you miss I’ll cut you in three pieces—body,
soul, and legs,” I think it will be admitted that to that Longstop at
any rate a holiday would not be regarded as a very great privilege,
especially when Nestor was not at all the boy (man, I should rather say)
not to endeavour conscientiously to fulfil any promise of the kind above
mentioned. I again repeat, this is an extreme case; and now, even if the
will were present, the opportunity would be wanting. Happy was the boy
who succeeded in making a catch, as in that case he was excused from
watching out for the rest of the day; still more serene must have been
the existence of the mustard and pepper keeper—the responsible duties of
which office relieved the fortunate holder from service in the field.

But what adepts we became in fielding under this rough treatment! I
would in those days stop a ball with my left hand, which, if I now saw
coming towards me, I should diligently avoid touching at all. So “there
is no cloud but has its silver lining;” and, perhaps, if in these latter
days Winchester has not held the laurels in cricket quite so firmly as of
old, it is in some respects owing to the mitigated apprenticeship served
by the boys in their Fagging days. This, alas! is not of much consequence
now, since it has been deemed expedient by the authorities to put an end
to the public-school matches at Lord’s, which tended so much to produce
a wholesome feeling of patriotic rivalry among the boys, and were always
looked forward to by all Wykehamists as the pleasantest rendezvous of the
year, where their spirits were refreshed by talking over past times with
old friends seldom seen but at those reunions.

I have heard, from the best authority, that the principal reason for no
longer permitting the Winchester boys to contend with Harrow and Eton
in the public arena at Lord’s is, that their parents complained that
they were put to great inconvenience by having to send up their sons to
London in the middle of the holidays, that they were put to considerable
expense, and the boys exposed to many temptations. These objections are
valid ones, I admit; but, I think, not insurmountable. As regards the
expense, I am certain that a fund could easily be raised that would cover
all the travelling expenses of the eleven for the next ten years; and as
regards the exposure of the boys to temptation, I am sure that, even if
they had no relations resident in London who could put them up, were the
want made known, hospitable doors would open in sufficient number, not
only to take in the eleven, but the whole school, if required; and the
boys’ proceedings would be as carefully looked after as if they were at
home. And I cannot doubt but that the old school is lowered in the eyes
of the public by its absence from the annual contest at Lord’s, and that
other schools will gradually usurp the position as one of the first in
England, which it has held for so many centuries.

I must, however, in justice, add that, from the present arrangement of
having the cricket-match with Eton played on alternate years at Eton and
Winchester, the boys themselves (excepting the eleven) certainly must
derive far greater amusement than they did heretofore from the knowledge
of the fact that the match was being played at London, where, besides
the eleven, there probably would not be half-a-dozen present. Now they
get two whole holidays; and when the match is played at Winchester,
half the Eton boys come over by railway, and are entertained in Hall,
so that the game is carried on in the presence of the two schools.
Notwithstanding this, I think that the annual contest of the principal
schools in the national game is an affair in which the interests of the
majority of Wykehamists ought to be consulted, and should take place in
the metropolis.

What a noble game cricket must be, when one loved it so much,
notwithstanding the previous training! What genuine excitement when
College and Commoners was played; what frantic shouting when Rapid got
well hold of a “Barter,” (see Glossary,) and sent the ball from “Spanish
Poplar,” right over Meads wall by “Log pond;” or when Cocky, from the
centre of “Turf,” landed one well into the middle of Commoners! They used
to hit hard in those days with a bat, as well as with a ground ash. How
_blasé_ one gets now-a-days! Oh for a quarter of an hour of genuine boy’s
enthusiasm!

Meads is always a pleasant spot to me. I played in a match there not long
ago against the garrison; but, alas! where was the fire that used to burn
within me! I got one run the first innings, and was bowled out first ball
by a slow underhand “Lob” (_tice_) the second; and when I attempted to
throw up the ball, it went ten yards wide of the wicket, my arm nearly
out of its socket, and I felt the pain in it for a week after. But I am
glad I got out soon, for I strolled round the old place, and inspected
all the well remembered nooks and corners; and the stones in the wall
so carefully smoothed and neatly carved with the names of past heroes.
Happy he who, on his return in after life, can find his unscarred; a sure
sign that he had left a respected name behind him. There was Amen Corner
still unchanged; I could even discern faint traces of

                         “S̄alvĕ D̆i|vā P̄o|tens”

that we chalked up years ago in honour of “Young Sadnose’s” powers of
scanning. Log pond, with its Champions, still exists, but much shorn in
its dimensions, and a row of trees planted in front. “Non Licet gate’s”
hinges looked as rusty as ever, (it was supposed only to be opened
when a boy was to be expelled.) Spanish Poplar was gone,—blown down by
a gale. How well I remember, when a small boy twelve years old, on my
first appearance in Meads, seeing “Long John” and ten other men pulling
at a condemned limb which was half sawn through, when the rope suddenly
snapped, and they all in an instant subsided on their backs in the middle
of Turf; how I rolled with delight at the scene! Since then I have often
rolled with delight, as well as from other sensations, in the old green
Meads; one had one’s trials and difficulties, yet, on the whole, I doubt
if I have ever been much happier.

About two acres in the centre of Meads was slightly raised above the rest
on a chalk foundation, and covered with turf, which was most carefully
kept, and constantly rolled, and in winter fenced all round. This, which
was called _par excellence_ “Turf,” was kept sacred for the use of the
Præfects and the first eleven, (called Senior Match;) except two corners,
which were allotted to Middle and Junior Match,—the former consisting of
the second eleven and Senior part, and the latter of the third eleven.

But I must now proceed to Football, a game I like (or rather, used to
like) far more than cricket. The reason is simple; I was a tolerably good
hand at the former, and rather a muff at the latter. Of all the games
of football that I have seen, I think none can compare in interest to
the Winchester “Six and Six.”[8] I hate the crowded games of twenty or
thirty a-side, where for one kick at the ball you receive a dozen on your
shins. In “Six and Six” your powers of pluck, endurance, strength, and
speed are constantly called into play; it is not all weight and hustling,
but speed and scientific kicking, that win the day. Kicking the ball up
into the air was considered very bad play, except when the ball had been
previously caught before it had touched the ground, when it was allowed,
_i.e._, if the kicker could get the chance, before one of the other side
was down upon him.

Our costume consisted of a jersey, flannel trousers, “Beeswaxers,”
(lace-up boots,) or “High-lows,” (low shoes,) with two or three pairs of
“Worsteders,” (thick worsted stockings,) the feet of all but one pair
being cut off.

Every day, during middle school, the two senior Præfects who intended to
play made out the “Roll” (list) of the side,—one was headed “Ad Rubrum
Murum” (which meant that that side was to kick towards Sick-house wall,)
and the other “Ad Foricam,” (_vice versâ_.) But Football wasn’t all beer
and skittles to the Fags. There was an institution called “Kicking in,”
which, while it lasted, was much worse than watching out at cricket,
although it had the very great merit of not continuing so long; for
even on a whole holiday we seldom had more than two hours of it. It was
managed as follows:—The ground for the game was marked out by two rows of
Juniors, who were obliged to keep exactly in line and prevent the ball
from passing outside them, or if it did, to put it back again. Midway
between each of the two ends of the line was stationed another boy, as
umpire, (“Goal,” he was called,) who stood with his legs wide apart, and
a gown rolled up at each foot: if the ball was kicked directly over his
head, or between his legs, without his touching it, it was a “Goal,”
and scored three for the party that kicked it; if directly over one of
the gowns at his feet (a “Gowner”) which counted two; or if it passed
between either of the gowns and the last boy of the line on that side, (a
“Schitt,”) one.

We used also to play large games, occasionally with twenty-two a-side,
which I did not much admire. The biggest boy on each side stood opposite
to each other, the remainder pressing up close round, with their heads
and bodies down in a compact mass; then, just to encourage them, the
captain would drop his great fist on their backs, with a mild injunction;
and the ball being deposited in the middle, the struggle began. This
was called a “Hot,” a very appropriate appellation. After surging
tumultuously about for a time, some boy would emerge from the mass with
the ball before him, when it would be kicked about a little, till it got
out of the line, when another “Hot” would be formed, and so on.[9] We
used to have annual matches with Commoners, six a-side, and also with
twenty-two; one of the proudest moments of my life was when I was first
unexpectedly told that I was to play in “Six and Six.”

The Juniors did not get much fun out of the regular games, as their part
consisted solely in kicking-in the ball, and receiving divers kicks and
“clows” in return for their vigilance; in the afternoons on holidays,
however, they used to get a kick at a ball on their own account, as there
was a kind of perpetual scratch game, without chosen sides, going on;
this was called “SS and Trees,” from two trees being the goal at one end,
and two iron clamps in the shape of two SS fastened in the wall at the
other.

Football at Oxford, (where Winchester, Eton, Harrow, Westminster,
Rugby, and various “T’other Schoolmen,” _i.e._, those who had not been
at a public school, used to play together, each with different rules,)
occasionally gave rise to some amusing incidents. On one occasion I saw a
Rugby man catch the ball, and, with a complacent smile, was then taking
a little run to give impetus to his intended kick off, when Podder, hot
from Winchester, darted out, and with one dexterous turn of his leg, laid
the Rugbean flat on the ground, and before he could scoop the mud out
of his mouth, and compose himself to articulate ejaculation, Podder had
carried the ball to the other end of the ground. It subsequently appeared
that by Rugby rules no one was allowed to interfere in such a case,
whereas at Winchester he who had caught the ball might kick if he could,
and if any one ran at him to interfere, he might then run away.

Football, though a splendid game for boys, does not do in after life, as
it requires constant practice both in running and the art of kicking.
About three years after I left, I was passing through Winchester,
and went down to College to play football, expecting to enjoy myself
immensely, and to explain to the degenerate youngsters how football used
to be played in our time. The first fair kick I got at the ball I missed
it altogether, and nearly kicked my own leg out of its socket; the
second time, remembering my previous failure, and determining to be more
careful, I buried my toes in the ground, just short of the ball, which
never moved, while my ancle nearly snapped across with the shock; the
third time I kicked well into the back of the tendon achillis of my other
leg, and was carried off howling. Since then I have confined myself to
looking on at football.

Fives we used to play against the back of school, which formed a spacious
“Ball Court.” The bat used is, I believe, peculiar to Winchester; it
was about two feet and a half in length, the part with which the ball
was struck expanding to about the size of a small lady’s hand, and
immediately above it the wood was planed thin, thus forming a powerful
spring. With this instrument the ball could be driven with great force;
and I have known it used for other purposes, for which it was very
effectual, though not very agreeable to one of the parties in that game.
One boy, I remember, kept a bat which he consecrated solely to this
amusement, and to the back of it he had nailed a donkey-shoe, which gave
great weight to his arguments. The balls used were small, about the size
of a large grape-shot, and cost sixpence a piece, which made the game
an expensive one; as, if the ball passed to the right or to the left of
the school wall against which we played, it vanished altogether from our
ken,—if it went to the left it went into Long-meads or Commoners, and if
to the right into Cloisters. We could, however, generally purchase back
at half-price from Long John about one quarter of those lost. Long John
was the College mason, who was always wandering about with a satellite
looking for something to do, but beyond occasionally scratching a brick,
I scarcely ever saw him doing anything like work. If asked what he was
doing, he always said, “Nothin’, sir;” at which occupation the satellite
was a most efficient coadjutor.

The Winchester “Bat-fives” was amusing enough when played in a
promiscuous way, but not, I think, a really good game, as it was too
difficult. I have scarcely ever seen even the best players return the
ball more than three or four times. The Fag’s share of the game was to
stand round the edge of the court and pick up the balls as they rolled
off; it was not nearly such hard work as watching-out at cricket, or
kicking-in at football, and the work being easy it did not entail so much
punishment; but it was far from pleasant, owing to the blinding glare
from the white concrete of which the floor was made. Mr Ridding, formerly
second Master, has most liberally built some excellent racket courts,
in what used to be “Long Meads,” but is now thrown into “Meads,” to the
great advantage of the boys.

A long red brick wall ran across Meads on the west side, in which
there was a door that led to “Sick-house,” situated in a field called
“Sick-house Meads.” It was presided over by a worthy old matron named
“Mother Maskell.” Her kind face is no longer there to soothe the invalid;
and I hope, for the sake of the boys, that her successor inherits, with
her other good qualities, her receipt for gooseberry fool. How we used
to scent it from afar; and the moment a fresh brew was ready, what a rush
to Sick-house! How we slid over the gate, which formed no barrier in
such a case! There were two kinds, “Husky” and “Non-husky;” the former
was decidedly the favourite, and the consumption was really alarming.
Notwithstanding this there were few of us ill in those times, and one
half of the number “Continent” were generally “Shuffling,” and the other
laid-up with wounds received in athletic exercises. One boy, I remember,
broke his arm three times in one year; the last time, the Master under
whom he was made him write out all the lessons that he would have had
to do if he had been in school, suggesting that he had broken his arm
on purpose to escape them. Certainly being “Continent” was an agreeable
change for a Fag, as he had no lessons to do, and escaped all fagging,
except from such Præfects as happened to be Continent also, and he also
got a “Thoke” in the morning till nine o’clock. When a boy was really ill
he slept at Sick-house. I only remember doing so on one occasion myself,
and that was when I caught the measles in the remarkable way above
mentioned, (_vide_ p. 127.) This was a very jolly period. I had them very
slightly, and there were four of us in a room together—Rasper, Badger,
Bumpus, and myself, and I was then, for the first time, initiated in the
mysteries of the science of Whist; one of us, who was the least unwell,
used to deal and collect the cards, which we threw into the middle of the
room as we played.

As I mentioned before, when a boy felt ill, or inclined to quit school
for a period, he had to get leave Continent,[10] which was done by
sending a boy in the morning first to get leave from his tutor, and then
from the Head Master; and when he returned to his school duties he was
said to “come abroad.”

During Long half all the unoccupied rooms in Sick-house were occupied
by the senior Præfects as private studies; and each of them chose a boy
as a “Reader,” whose nominal office was to read aloud the “English” of
any Greek or Latin author his master might be studying. This was a much
coveted appointment, as the fortunate possessor was exempt from all
fagging.

There was another field between Sick-house Meads and Commoners belonging
to College, called “Long Meads,” which, to the best of my belief, was
only used to feed the Fellows’ cows. This is now thrown into Meads; and
if Sick-house Meads could also be added, what a magnificent playground it
would make!

It has been, I believe, often suggested that the boys at Winchester were
not allowed sufficient exercise in the open air. I do not think there was
any ground for this complaint as regards the College boys at any rate,
who were sent at least three times a week to the top of Hills, besides
having Meads close at hand during all play hours. Commoners were not
so well off, as they only had one hour on school-days to breathe fresh
air, in which time they had to walk half a mile out and back to the
indifferent field forming their gymnasium; doubtless they now have access
to Meads.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]




CHAPTER XI.

THE JUNIOR ON HILLS.

    On—Mizmaze—The Badger—Swimming Lessons—Practical Jokes—Trial
    for Assault—Town and Gown Row.


Soon after morning chapel on a Holiday or Remedy all the boys assembled
at “Gates”—_i.e._, in seventh chamber passage—each boy choosing a
“Socius,” or companion, as in marching “on to Hills” we always walked
two and two, College first, and Commoners after. At the word “On” from
the Præfect of Hall we started off at a quick pace, the Præfects walking
on the road, the rest on the footpath. The former had the privilege of
calling “off” an Inferior to walk with them, as they were allowed to
range the country; whereas the others were confined to the top of St
Catherine’s Hill. On we went, the small College boys at a sharp trot to
keep up with the long steps of the bigger ones in front, and urged on by
the Commoners behind, round the corner of Warden’s garden, where some boy
would duck under the rails, and dart off to Bungy’s for strawberries and
cream, or sausages, according to the season, taking his chance of another
and very different kind of refreshment if caught in the fact; then over
Blackbridge, past “Commoner’s field” and “Domum tree,” over the three
stepping-stiles (to be able to jump which, both going and returning,
was a great object of ambition to an enterprising Junior) to Tunbridge,
where (if names were not to be called at the top of Hills) the Præfects
and their “Teejays” went off on their own devices, and the rest up the
steep ascent of St Catherine’s Hill. Here the latter amused themselves
by playing cricket, rounders, or football, according to the time of
the year or state of the weather, plying the “Mousedigger” (a kind of
diminutive pickaxe) in search of mice, or threading the intricacies of
“Mizmaze,” a labyrinth supposed to have been cut in the turf by the
author of “Domum” during the holidays, when he was forced to remain in
Winchester instead of going home. The legend further declares that he cut
the verses of Domum on the bark of the tree which still bears the name,
and then committed suicide. By and by the voices of the three Juniors
calling Domum, (two of whom had to make the circuit of “Trench,” and the
other cross the summit of Hills,) warned them that it was time to go
“on,” when, at a signal from the Præfect of Hall below, we rushed down to
Tunbridge, and were marshalled on our way home. If violent rain came on,
these proceedings were dispensed with, and we were allowed to find our
way home as fast as we could; this was called “Skirmishing on.”

Such was the usual routine of the Inferiors on hills; but the Præfects
and their Teejays had a more lively time of it. For them there were
ducks and green peas at Twyford, bathing in “Pot,” (if summer time,)
a foray on the young rooks, chariot races, and, last and greatest, the
chase of the immortal badger. If one can’t follow a fox on horseback, one
may do worse than follow a badger on foot—that is, if one’s lungs and
legs are in as good condition as ours used to be in those days. At some
appointed meet, “Turner,” the badger provider, clad in a rusty velveteen
shooting jacket, with a cur or two at his heels, and the noble animal
in a sack, used to meet us. On the mouth of the sack being opened, away
went badger at a steady enduring pace across the downs. He did not run
extremely fast, but then he could go for ever. His strong point was going
up a steep hill, when he could beat the fastest runner; going down hill
he was not so brilliant. We generally gave him one hundred yards start
before we followed, Turner bringing up the rear with the dogs in couples.
Sometimes, instead of crossing the downs, he would make for the water
meadows, and then the runs were more exciting as he took to the water
like an otter; and as with the old and new barge river and mill streams,
there were several pieces of water of some breadth and depth to pass,
our swimming as well as running powers were called into play. When we
had had enough, the dogs were let loose and the badger stopped. Turner’s
excitement at this moment lest his badger or dogs should receive any
injuries was intense, and indeed with some reason, as a badger and dog,
locked in an embrace, require great persuasion to make them forego their
hold. He used to throw himself on the combatants, and eagerly exhort some
of those up to “lay hould of his tail,” while he himself would chew away
at that of the badger or of any dog that would not quit his gripe. The
badger being extricated from the dogs, or the dogs from the badger, as
the case might be, he was returned to the quiet of his sack again till
the next morning Hills.

These morning exercises produced considerable appetite. Before starting
for Hills we used generally to indulge in a pint of coffee and two
pennyworth of biscuits from Lacroix’s; then we not unfrequently ran to
Twyford as hard as we could put legs to the ground to regale on ducks and
green peas; which finished, we would just have sufficient leisure to run
back to College in time for the regulation breakfast, eked out with fried
potatoes, kidneys, sausages, &c. &c.

The time most looked forward to by the Juniors was “Long Meads”—_i.e._,
that time in summer when Toy-time was dispensed with—and we went every
evening (and on holidays in the afternoon also) on to Hills, or rather
to “Underhills,” as we did not go up St Catherine’s Hill, but ranged the
meadows below. On such evenings the Fag who was unable to swim would
have his education completed in that respect. The method of instruction
was well calculated for the end in view, but not, strictly speaking,
agreeable to the pupil. The course was much in this way:—Four boys would
take the tyro, one by each arm and leg, and, with “once, twice, thrice,
and away,” send him flying into the middle of “Pot”—_i.e._, a lock full
of water. On emerging half choked, he would be supported for an instant
by one or two other boys already in the water, and then, by an energetic
pressure on the shoulders with their hands, followed up by a kick when he
had descended to their feet, he would be sent to investigate the pebbles
at the bottom. A few evenings of this generally gave the victim a notion
of how to support himself in the water. An Inferior was not allowed to
bathe in Pot till he could prove his swimming powers by swimming from
Tunbridge to Pot, a distance of about a quarter of a mile. The other
favourite bathing places were “Milk Hole,” immediately below Pot; and
Tunbridge—_i.e._, that part of the river near the bridge of that name.
In the latter place I remember seeing some practical jokes played that
were nearly proving serious. In one case, a new boy, somewhat taller
and bigger than the average, and a good swimmer, when going to bathe in
Tunbridge for the first time, asked if it was deep enough for a header.
On being told that it was, he took a run and jumped in, and (the water
being low at the time, and even when full not more than four feet and
a half deep) cut himself severely about the face and chest. On another
occasion, one boy pushed another into the river, clothes and all, close
to the open hatch, through which the water was rushing furiously; he was
carried through a ten-foot brick tunnel, and rolled out on the stones
below; providentially he was not much hurt. Another practical joke,
of which Tunbridge was the theatre, was a more meritorious proceeding
than those previously described. There was a ruffian who was always
lurking about trying to sell spirits to the small boys. He had often
been threatened with condign punishment if caught. At last he was taken
in the fact, and summarily punished, by being thrown into Tunbridge. He
was a tall man, and the water, when he recovered his legs, did not come
higher than his waist; but that by no means prevented his swearing at
the trial that subsequently took place at Quarter Sessions, that it was
out of his depth, and he was nearly drowned. On his cross examination,
when asked how he got out, he admitted that he walked out. This trial
created a great excitement, not only in College, but in the town, and the
court was besieged by an excited mob, who were frantic at the treatment
that their brother had received from the bloated little aristocrats. I
am sorry to say that they triumphed, as the magistrates fined the boys
who were summoned £10 a head, which was immediately paid by the College
authorities; and it was rather a general opinion at the time, that if the
mob about the court doors had not been so clamorous, the fine would have
been somewhat less,—even if the summons had not been dismissed altogether.

I forget whether it was specially the result of this little incident, or
whether it was the casual development of a chronic irritation between
the boys and the “Snobs,” that produced a somewhat serious town and gown
row during my residence at Winchester.[11] There had been mutterings of
a coming storm for some time typified by occasional sets-to between
some individual boys and snobs, and forays by the latter on the clothes
or towels of solitary small bathers. The town party chose their time for
a demonstration with peculiar prudence. They waited till Commoners had
gone, which they did on the Saturday before Election week. On the Monday
following, the boys (now reduced in number to seventy, of whom at least
twenty remained in College preparing for the coming examination) went on
to Hills. They had not been there long before it became known that there
was a gathering of the enemy at Twyford; and expresses being sent back
to College that “Snobs were on,” and for the reserve to come up, we took
the initiative, and went to Twyford to anticipate the attack. We hadn’t
long to wait, and there was some very pretty fighting both in the way of
general skirmishes and individual mills. We got the best of it; and some
of the bigger boys, elated with success, determined to push up to the
stronghold of the enemy in the town. I was much too small for this part
of the campaign, and, with the other little boys, retired behind the
breastworks of College, where, by the by, we arrived very considerably
later than the regulation hour. I have heard heart-stirring accounts of
the heroic deeds of the heavy brigade, but not having been present I
cannot particularly describe them. I believe that they carried on the
attack bravely in the town for some time till overcome by numbers. The
boys retreated to a path which leads out of High Street down by the river
side to College, at the head of which (where there were two posts to
prevent carts passing) they took their stand, and for a considerable time
held their own gallantly. But at last they were obliged to break and fly,
making good their retreat into College, however, without anything like
serious damage. On numbering their forces, one boy was found missing, and
grave apprehension was entertained for his safety, which, however, was
soon dissipated by his unexpected appearance from the Warden’s house. In
the flight he had tripped and fallen into Bungy’s ditch, where he wisely
lay quiet till the throng of pursuers had rushed past, when he gently
strolled towards College, and opportunely meeting with a well-known
barrister who was taking his evening’s walk, he got him to give him a
lift over the wall of Warden’s garden, and was safe.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]




CHAPTER XII.

THE JUNIOR ON LEAVE OUT.

    Saints’ Days—Early Leave Out—Poaching—Rowing—A Dinner—Sunday
    Leave Out.


Thoroughly to realise the merits of the holy men of old, one should have
been at a public school; nobody ever welcomed the recurrence of their
anniversaries with more sincere joy than a Junior at Winchester, always
supposing that he had friends in the town or neighbourhood who would
invite him to visit them on such occasions, otherwise the advantages,
as hinted at above, were more than doubtful. If invited by friends in
the neighbourhood, we were allowed “Early leave out,” _i.e._, from
immediately after morning chapel; or if by friends in the town, from one
o’clock; in both cases we had to be back for evening chapel, at a quarter
before nine. I was fortunate enough to have hospitable friends, and a
Saint’s-day seldom failed to be a day of rejoicing to me.

If we had early leave out we used generally to hire a “four-wheeler” from
Watt’s of the Blue Boar, and gallop out to our destination, arriving
probably before the family were up; and the breakfasts we used to devour
on these occasions must have caused our kind entertainers to rejoice that
Saints’ days did not occur every day of the week.

We frequently spent our days in fishing or shooting, according to the
season of the year, varied with skating, boating, rifle practice in a
chalk pit, &c., &c. Our shooting expeditions were generally undertaken
without leave from any proprietor, but I have not much on my conscience
as regards the amount of our depredations. The best bag that we ever made
was, to the best of my recollection, one hare, two rats, a swallow, and
fifteen larks. On that memorable day we quietly walked into a preserve
four abreast, and blazed away, without doing the least harm, (except
to one most unfortunate hare, that would sit still,) until a keeper
appeared. I immediately bolted, shouting to my companions to separate and
do the same; instead of doing so, however, they followed me in Indian
file, and we were ultimately run to ground in a chalk pit. Our pursuer
had no roof to his mouth; and between that, recent beer, rage, and
exhaustion from the pace he had come, his speech was perhaps slightly
incoherent. I offered him a cigar, but he was not amenable to reason, and
we ultimately left him in the chalk pit gnashing his teeth.

This was not our last interview with this gentleman, but on the second
occasion our intentions were innocent; we were walking through this same
plantation, without guns, or any notion of game, when we espied a hare
lying dead under a tree; on closer inspection it proved to be caught in
a wire; we held an inquest on the body, and the unanimous opinion being
that a _post-mortem_ examination was necessary, and that that would more
conveniently be entered upon at home, it was forthwith tucked up in one
of our gowns; but, lo! scarcely had this been accomplished when, in the
tree immediately above that under which the corpse had been lying, we
heard a cracking of twigs, and before we could fully realise the state of
things, our friend without a palate lay on his back in the midst of us.
As he had heard all the particulars of the inquest, he must have known
that we were not the murderers, but on our representing this to him, he
very sagely remarked, that he had been up in the tree for six hours,
and that he was quite contented with having secured us, and had not the
slightest intention of mounting guard again for the chance of discovering
the real offenders. We had a long argument with him, but he failed to see
the thing in the proper light, and we with some difficulty succeeded in
compromising the affair for a half-sovereign.

Popjoy was not contented with a little poaching in the shooting line, but
used also occasionally to indulge his fishing propensities without going
through the preliminary form of requesting leave. He one day had recourse
to a stratagem to indulge in his favourite pursuit that for brazen
impudence beats anything of the kind I ever heard of. He drove over to
Avington, and commenced fishing in the Duke of Buckingham’s best water.
Of course he hadn’t been there half an hour before the keeper appeared,
saying—

“You mustn’t fish here, sir.”

_Popjoy._ “I have the Duke’s leave; please stand back, you disturb the
fish.”

_K._ “What’s your name.”

_P._ “Popjoy.”

_K._ “Don’t know that name, and you must be off.”

“Wont you believe the Duke’s own handwriting,” rejoined the undaunted
Popjoy, handing him a letter received that morning from his affectionate
mamma.

The keeper twisted the mysterious document about in his hands for a
little, and returned it to the owner with a grunt. Popjoy then proceeded
to extract from him all possible information about flies, the haunts of
the fish, &c., &c., and had a particularly good day’s sport.

Another great resource on Leave-out days was a row on the river in one of
Etheridge’s boats,—they were rather sorry tubs, but we managed to extract
amusement out of them; if, in this particular line, “_militavi non sine
gloriâ_,” I can’t say that my Winchester education had much to do with
it. However, the most consummate master of the art of rowing that ever
adorned Oxford always preferred to take raw hands and teach them to pull,
to Eton or Westminster men, who came up to Oxford fancying themselves
perfect already; and I am proud to say that among the immortal Seven of
Henley there were two Wykehamists.

I am indebted to the liberal hospitality of an esteemed relative for
many very pleasant days, and especially for one, which was perhaps the
jolliest I spent during the whole time I was at Winchester I received a
letter from him one morning, informing me that on a given day he would
pass through Winchester, and requesting me to furnish him with a list of
boys to ask to dinner; accordingly I selected half a dozen, and we got
leave out for the afternoon. He only stopped to change horses, (it was
in the posting days,) and on his departure he told the landlord of the
George to provide us with the best dinner he could, gave me a five-pound
note, and a “tip” for all my friends. That was a specimen of the tip
royal; how fervently we blessed him, and what a jolly dinner we had!

Every alternate Sunday also we were allowed to spend the afternoon with
friends in the town, if invited, but we had to be back for five o’clock
chapel. Happy were those boys who were so fortunate as I was in being
acquainted with Mr Sissmore, the patriarch of the College fellows, whose
hospitable board was always surrounded on these days by a circle of boys,
whom he used to amuse with stories of the pranks of their ancestors, as
he remembered many of their grandfathers when little boys at school.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]




CHAPTER XIII.

THE JUNIOR IN STANDING-UP WEEK.

    Standing-up—Commoners—Pealing.


The last two weeks of the Long-half, which ended about the middle of
July, were called respectively “Standing-up” and “Election-week.” The
former was rather a time of trial for the Juniors, the latter for the
Præfects and Senior part.

Standing-up is an institution peculiar to Winchester, I believe. During
the whole of the proceeding year all the boys below Senior part were
expected to learn a number of lines by heart; there was a minimum limit
assigned to each part, but any boy was allowed to take up as many as he
chose,—more than ten thousand have been said by one boy. We were allowed
to take up Greek prose, one line of which counted for five of Virgil,
and one of Latin prose or Greek verse for two; Horace’s Odes, three for
two. These lines had to be said in eight lessons; and the marks given
had a very decided effect on the relative position of the boys, as it
very often happened that the boy who at the beginning of the week was
well ahead of the others in his part, when Standing-up was over found
himself nowhere, and _vice versâ_. Every boy had to provide himself with
a “Standing-up paper,” which was divided by lines into eight partitions,
in each of which he wrote out a description of one lesson, and as
each was said to the Master, he signed his name at the bottom, with a
particular mark to define the style of the performance, both as regards
the construing and repetition. These marks were as follows:—For supreme
excellence, “Quam optimè;” for great merit, “Optimè;” for a tolerably
good performance, “Benè;” for an indifferent one, “Mediocriter;” for
failure, “Malè.” A certain number was added to each boy’s account in the
Classicus paper for each lesson, calculated according to the number of
lines and the marks obtained; but a “Malè” precluded him from having any
score for that lesson. There were no other lessons during this week, and
it was a time of great excitement.

I remember one boy having an inflammation of the eyes just before
Standing-up week; to his great disgust it was getting rapidly well, and
knowing that if it was allowed to continue improving he would be called
on to say his eight lessons, of which he knew but little, he held his
eyes to a key-hole, through which there was a strong draught, and then
administered a pinch of snuff to them. The plan succeeded; he certainly
had no Standing-up to read over, or anything else for a long time; and if
he ever recovered his sight it was more than his friends expected, or he
perhaps deserved.

When I was at Winchester there were twin brothers who were so exactly
alike that if they themselves knew which was which it was more than any
one else did. On one occasion they turned this likeness to account in a
very ingenious manner. They were both in the same Part, and both took up
[in one lesson at any rate] the same Standing-up. One of them, who knew
his tolerably well, went to the Master and got through successfully; on
going out he met his brother, who was just going to say his, in great
trepidation, as he was not prepared; however, a bright idea struck the
more fortunate brother, he changed his neck-cloth, tousled his hair, put
a bit of sticking-plaster on his nose, went back, and said his lesson a
second time, on his brother’s account, with great _éclat_.

When Standing-up was over the Commoners went home, as their Præfects and
Senior-part had nothing to do with the examination in Election week,
which was solely for competition for scholarships at New College, which
were not then open to them. This leads me to mention some peculiar
solemnities which took place in Commoners towards the end of the half.
About six weeks before that happy period, for three consecutive Fridays,
a victim was chosen who had made himself unpopular in the school, and
immediately after breakfast he had to mount on the Toys (which were in
the dining-hall) and quietly submit to be pelted with Pontos, (balls made
of hot bread,) the ceremony being commenced and ended with chaunting a
“Peal,” which was, on the first Friday, “Locks and Keys;” on the second,
“Boots and Leathers;” and on the third, “Gomer Hats.” The senior Præfects
appointed the sacrifice the first day, the junior the second, and the
Coursekeeper the third.

Immediately after dinner on the last three Sundays, Commoners exercised
their lungs with the following peals: On the first “Party Rolls,” after
which the senior Præfect made out a list of the routes to be taken by the
different boys; on the second, “Money and Direction Rolls,” when each boy
had to write on a piece of paper his governor’s address, and the amount
of journey-money he required; and on the last “Packing up.”




[Illustration]




CHAPTER XIV.

THE JUNIOR IN ELECTION WEEK.

    “Ad Portas”—“Electors”—“Candlesticks”—“Founders”—Examinations—
    “Superannuates”—Medal Speaking—Election Dinners—Effects of Eating
    Ice when Hot—Resignation—“Domum”—“Ball”—“Jam Lucis”—“Batlings”—Last
    Breakfast.


The last week of the Long half, or “Election week,” was indeed a
“Jubilee” for the Fags, inasmuch as there were no lessons whatever, and
the Præfects were either undergoing their examination or preparing for
it, and consequently too busy to play cricket to any great extent.

On Tuesday, the Warden of New College and the other electors were
received at Middle Gate by the boys, headed by the Præfect of Hall, who
addressed them with a Latin oration (“Ad Portas.”) The Electors were
the Warden and two fellows of New College, (called “Posers,”) with the
Warden, Sub-warden, and Head Master of Winchester. Each of these had in
turn the privilege of nominating a boy for admission into Winchester till
all vacancies were filled, of which there were generally about twelve,
but always many more “Candidates,” (or “Candlesticks,” as they were often
called.) Two fortunate individuals were selected by vote from among such
of the candidates as could prove their descent from the Founder, and were
placed at the head of the list, and got the first two vacancies. They
were called Founders, and had several privileges, the principal of which
was, that two of them were always brought up to the head of the roll at
every election for the first two vacancies at New College; they were also
not obliged to leave (“to be superannuated”) at the age of eighteen, as
all the others were. I have known several cases of Founders remaining
till they were past twenty, and one in particular, who, year after year,
saw other Founders put over his head, till he left in despair at a green
old age; and it was reported that, on one occasion when playing against
Eton at Lord’s, on his making a fine hit, a small voice from the crowd
was heard to call out, “Well hit, Papa, run along.”

[Illustration: THE LATIN SPEECH—AD PORTAS.]

After Ad Portas, the Electors adjourned to Election Chamber over Middle
gate, accompanied by “Semper Testis,” a gentleman in a white hat, who was
never seen except on very solemn occasions, and whose functions it would
be sacrilegious to attempt to investigate.

After a time “The Scrutiny” commenced. This was effected by sending for
the seven senior and seven junior boys, and examining them as to the
internal economy of the College. I don’t think that much information was
often extracted by this operation.

On Wednesday morning the Candlesticks were examined, or rather supposed
to be, as it was merely a form, their seniority on the Roll being
settled by the nomination of the Electors as above mentioned. They had to
try to construe a bit of Latin, and were then asked if they could sing,
and, whatever their answer, had to repeat the words, “All people who on
earth do dwell.”

After this began the Examination of Sixth book and Senior part, which
was a very different affair. They were divided into three parts, called
respectively “Senior, Middle, and Junior Fardel.” It was brought to an
end on Thursday evening with “a Varying”—_i.e._, a short extemporaneous
composition in Latin verse. After the examination was over, there was
great excitement till “The Roll”[12] came down, which gave the names of
those who were to go to New College and enter Winchester. It was always
brought by the Head Porter, Poole, to the window of Sixth, and delivered
to Senior Founder, when loud was the cheering if there was no change in
the roll, or if some very popular individual was promoted, or held his
own contrary to the general expectation.

There were generally about four or five vacancies in New College each
year. The date of a boy’s birth might be of serious importance to him, as
if it occurred just before Election he would be Superannuate, and could
only fill any vacancy that occurred before the Election following; but if
his birthday was three days later, he would not be Superannuate till the
next Election. This was called “gaining a year by Election.”

But other things besides examinations were going on in this eventful
week. On Tuesday there was the Medal speaking in school, when the rows
at the west end of school were filled with an interested audience of old
Wykehamists. On Wednesday, Thursday, and Friday there were grand dinners
in hall to which all old Wykehamists and many others were invited; the
hospitality was indeed unbounded. The big wigs sat at the high table,
and down the centre of hall was laid a row of tables at which all the
other strangers sat, with the second master at the top. The Candlesticks
sat at Tub mess, presided over by the Bible Clerk for the week; and below
them were the Grace singers, Superannuates, and “Children.” These latter
were appointed by the Electors, who each named one. Their duties were
to pocket a sovereign, and eat a particularly good dinner. The other
boys sat on the south side. The dinner given to them was mutton-pies and
“Stuckling.” This latter is a production which, I am happy to say, is
peculiar to Winchester, and fortunately only to be found there during
two days in Election week. In external appearance and in section it is
similar to a mince pie, and in taste it is something like one that has
been soaked in vinegar, and then kept till it is mouldy. It is made of
chopped beef, currants, suet, apples, and carraway seeds. I have seldom
seen anybody taste it a second time. These rations were, however, scorned
by the boys; and as half the good things from the centre table were
handed over to them, they made up for any past deficiencies in the way
of dinner, in a manner that must have been surprising to the lookers on.
Venison pasty, currant-pies, pea-soup, ham, ducks, cucumber, fish, &c.,
disappeared as if by magic, washed down by libations of “Huff,” (very
strong ale.) The gospel was read by the Bible Clerk for the week after
the first course, and at the conclusion the beautiful grace was sung by
the boys, with the help of the cathedral choristers and singing men.
On Friday the boys had no dinner in hall, where the Dons had it all to
themselves, and afterwards adjourned for wine and dessert to the Warden’s
Gallery, where they complimented each other in the usual after-dinner
style.

All through the week the Fags revelled in cricket on their own account,
and strawberries and cream and ices were supplied in a continual
stream by the Oxford men and old Wykehamists, who resorted to Meads in
considerable numbers. One can get too much of a good thing; for on one
of these days I came up melting with heat from Meads, and going into
chambers washed my hands and face, and consumed a quantity of ice. The
next morning when I awoke I found my pillow saturated with blood, which
had flowed from my nose during my sleep,—this was the only time in my
life that I have ever had a _spontaneous_ effusion from that organ. The
morning following, when I awoke, I felt a strange irritation over my
face and hands, with some symptoms of eruption. I sent for a doctor,
who informed me I had the smallpox. I denied the soft impeachment, as I
felt perfectly well. I was sent home, and my face and hands soon became
one mass of pimples, and, after about a fortnight, all the skin peeled
off, and I recovered with the loss of my complexion, which exchanged its
former peculiar delicate hue for that of boiled veal, which it has ever
since retained.

When a boy was going to leave the School for good, he had to send in
his resignation to the Warden, written on a slip of paper. It ran as
follows:—

    “_Ego Robertus Jones omne jus quod habeo aut unquam habui in
    hoc Collegio Beatæ Mariæ Winton prope Winton, ætate cogente
    (_or_ parentibus volentibus) libenter resigno._”

The last Friday evening of the half year there was a grand celebration
of “Domum” in school, which was adorned with branches and banners. A
military band was engaged, and “Domum” was sung by all the company till
they were hoarse. It was an exceedingly gay and animated affair. Numbers
of ladies graced the school with their presence, and crowds of old
Wykehamists, fancying themselves boys once more, wandered about among
the old familiar scenes. From school the company adjourned to Meads, and
then to the Chamber quadrangle, at each place singing “Domum” louder
than before, till at last the power failed, and the ladies, visitors, and
Superannuates went to recruit their energies for a brief period before
going to the “Domum ball” at St John’s rooms, of which the Superannuates
were stewards, and which was generally kept up with tremendous energy far
into the small hours. The boys’ last breakfast at the George or White
Hart formed an appropriate supper for the most enthusiastic dancers.

After chapel on the last morning all the boys, with the second master
at their head, marched round the quadrangle, singing the beautiful
Latin hymn commencing with _Jam lucis orto sidere_; they then adjourned
to Sixth, where the journey money was distributed, and then went off
rejoicing to the “Last breakfast.”

There was generally an exciting contest between the adherents of
the George and White Hart hotels, as to which should provide this
entertainment. The former generally had the call; but one year, when
some of us had made a particularly good feed at the latter establishment,
we got up a little private canvass before the usual time, and to the
great disgust of the Præfects, who were all Georgists, we carried the
day triumphantly. The expense was defrayed by the boys subscribing the
last three “Batlings,” (_i.e._, the weekly shilling allowed each boy.)
This was rather an illusory coin, for we seldom actually fingered it, as
some one of the College servants generally had a kind of prescriptive
right to a benefit; and whenever Saturday arrived, Præfect of Hall’s
valet was sure to come round to ask the boys if they would give their
batlings to Rat Williams, or Dungy, or Purver, or Long John, or some
other equally deserving individual. The last breakfast was a decidedly
jolly and a very good repast,—in fact, it was a regular dinner, with tea
and coffee instead of wine. Then the inn-yard was full of postchaises
and four-wheelers, with a four-horse coach or two drawn up outside; and
the exulting Junior slipping a shilling into the expectant hand of the
obsequious “Yessah,” stepped proudly into his vehicle, and soon forgot
all the troubles of his first half in delightful anticipation of coming
festivities.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]




CHAPTER XV.

CONCLUSION.


If I could only flatter myself that any of my readers have felt one
quarter of the pleasure in reading my little book that I have derived
from writing it, I should be more than satisfied. On looking it over,
however, I have some misgivings; I fear that those who know not
Winchester may think the subject too trivial for illustration, and that
Wykehamists may regret that so good a subject has been so indifferently
handled.

It has surprised me to find how many occurrences, names, words, and faces
that for years had lain dormant in my mind, started up again in my
memory, as I sauntered through Chambers, School, and Meads; how strange
was the sensation to be looked at as a stranger, in a place every stone
of which was as familiar to me, nay, I may say more familiar to me, than
any other spot in the world. The boys, their names, their dress, their
games, their quaint language, (of which I have endeavoured to draw up a
glossary,) all seem unchanged; and even I fancied that I myself was once
more a Junior, till mechanically snatching at a ball rolling past me, my
vertebræ most disagreeably reminded me what o’clock it was.

It has often occurred to me how very remarkably the relative positions of
boys change in after-life; and if all those who were my school-fellows
could be collected together how differently we should regard each other.
Such a gathering would be of course impossible, even if death had not
cut short the career of very many; scattered through every portion of
the globe, working hard in their different professions, or vegetating
in luxurious ease or careless indolence, how contrary to all our
expectations has many a one turned out; some, neglected and despised
while at school, have risen to eminence, while others, whose early youth
seemed to give bright promise, have never raised their heads above the
common throng. This change is even more remarkable in the physical
appearance of individuals than in their moral character. I am myself, in
some respect, an example of this. I left school when I was seventeen,
if anything rather smaller than other boys of my age; some years after
I was at a ball at Glasgow, when I saw a little officer whose face was
perfectly familiar to me, and I perceived that mine was not strange to
him, so we soon fraternized; I found that my friend was Long Eves, as we
used to call him from his being so tall. I am no giant, and I now found
that I had overtopped him by a head. At Oxford I found men who, when at
Winchester with me, could have thrashed me with one hand, but who then,
if engaged in such a contest, would I think have preferred the use of
three.

But I must not quit my subject altogether without noticing some of the
more important changes that have taken place in the institutions of the
College since the time when I was first admitted. I will mention them in
the same order that I observed when treating of them as they were in my
time.

The Choristers are now no longer mere fags to the boys, but really do
sing, and have had a handsome school built for their accommodation.
The old Commoners’ buildings were removed in my time, and replaced by
a more commodious and hideous structure, in which for some time the
head-master received boarders. These have all migrated to four masters’
houses in Culver’s Close. They still call themselves Commoners, so that,
for purposes of athletic competitions, &c., the school is divided into
College, Commoners, and Houses (these latter being the occupants of
the other five masters’ houses not in Culver’s Close). The building
which was vacated by Commoners has been adorned and renovated by Mr.
Butterfield, and now presents quite a respectable appearance. In it the
new Library and various lecture rooms are located. The College boys are
still 70 in number, but the number in Commoners and Houses has more
than doubled since 1836, when there were about 120 (I believe at one
time they dwindled down to 65). There are now about 350, and, if more
masters’ houses were built, this number might be greatly increased. There
are now nine masters’ houses, in each of which from 35 to 40 boys are
accommodated, and the number of applications from anxious parents who
wish to get their boys into the school is so excessive as to cause great
embarrassment to the masters and much disappointment to the candidates.

In College the office of Præfect of Tub has been abolished, and a Præfect
of Library installed in his place. There are now only two half remedies
(Tuesdays and Thursdays) in each week; but Thursday is a whole remedy in
the Summer term, and there is a vacation of three weeks at Easter. Going
in procession to “Hills” is discontinued, and the boys may go where they
like (except into the town) out of school hours. Watching-out at cricket
is considerably limited, and “kicking-in” at football entirely abolished.
The College Chambers[13] (except Fourth) are removed to the two storeys
above, which were supposed to be occupied by the Fellows, but were hardly
ever used by them. In the new Chambers there is every necessary appliance
for decency and comfort, so that the Junior in winter has no longer to
rub his miserable little nose with a bit of ice, and think he is washing
himself, but can revel in any amount of fresh water indoors. The old
Chambers are mostly used as studies, book-chambers, and toy-time as
before; but one is used as a laundry and another as a dressing-room after
football, cricket, &c. The boys have tea found for them in Hall, instead
of having to go to sick-house for it. The dinner takes place at one
o’clock. The boys get crockery instead of trenchers to eat their meals
off, and knives and forks to eat them with.[14] Prime joints are carved
by the servants, and a master is present. The pandemonium which took
place when I was a Junior at the six o’clock dinner has happily entirely
departed. At supper gaslight illumines the Hall, instead of the feeble
flickering of a few dips. The ceremony of the oath is abolished. The
Morning Service in chapel is at 7.50, on Saturday evenings at 5.30, on
Sundays at 9, 11, and 5, and on Saints’ days at 9 A.M. Only the members
of the Choir wear surplices. The boys only go to Cathedral on the second
Sunday in each month.

School is now kept closed, and is only opened for concerts, lectures,
&c. Its appearance has much changed. The seats and the fixed forms which
supported them are swept away, a handsome organ is erected at the east
end, and the “Tabula Legum” has been moved to another position over the
entrance-door. The mouldings of the cornices are picked out in colour,
the wainscoting varnished; and the magnificent room presents a great
contrast to what it was when it was the only living room for the boys in
play as well as in school hours.

The area of College Meads has been much extended by throwing down the
walls which separated it from “Long” and “sick house” Meads. A racket
and fives courts have been erected by the Ridding family for the benefit
of the School. There is a large gymnasium, and very extensive buildings
erected for additional accommodation for invalids. A splendid additional
cricket-ground has been laid out adjoining the old Meads, which together
make, I fancy, the finest playground attached to any school in the world.

The glories of the old Election week have altogether vanished. The
election to Winchester is still in the middle of July; and there is a
dinner in Hall on Domum Day, but there are very few old Wykehamists in
attendance. The parents and tutors of the candidates for election muster
strong for the examinations, which last three days; and the ordeal they
have now to pass through is very different indeed from that which I
have described as taking place when I was a candidate. The distinction
and privileges of Founders’ kin are entirely abolished. Commoners are
admitted to Election Chamber, and have an equal chance with College boys
of getting scholarships at New College.[15]

Besides all these alterations in the buildings and regulations,[16] there
are many fresh institutions which are sources of great interest to the
boys. There is a Rifle Corps, a Debating Society, Shakespeare Society,
Glee Club, Chapel Choir, a Boat and a Golf Club. Golf, however, is not
allowed in the Summer term.

On the whole, I do not think it would be a great exaggeration to say that
there have been more changes in the school arrangements since 1835 than
took place in the whole period from the foundation to that date.

As regards the changes that have been enforced on the College by the
Government, I feel myself incompetent to form an opinion. I have heard
them both extolled and vituperated by individuals whose opinions are
worthy of respect, and who have the welfare of the school at heart. At
any rate, I earnestly hope that the good effects expected by the former
will be fully realised, and the forebodings of the latter prove illusory.
I have little doubt myself that as long as the moral and physical
wellbeing of the boys is so carefully looked after as it now is, that
Wykeham’s College will continue to maintain its high reputation; and
though but few of her sons may dazzle the world by their wealth, rank,
or power, the majority may yet, at any rate, prove always by their manly
and honourable bearing, that they know the meaning of the motto of their
illustrious founder,

[Illustration: MANNERS MAKYTH MAN]




NOTE.


Mr. Wrench has recently published a “Dictionary of Winchester Slang,”
which has probably had a wide circulation among Wykehamists. He has
given a list of all the words he could collect, used in days before my
time, and those of more recent coinage. In the following Glossary I have
strictly confined myself to those in use while I was in the school. It
interested me much to learn from Mr. Wrench’s book, not only the number
of quite new words (for instance, the title of his work—“Notions”—was
invented subsequent to my period), but also the change in the meaning of
several of the words which are still used.




[Illustration]




GLOSSARY OF WORDS, PHRASES, AND CUSTOMS, PECULIAR TO WINCHESTER
COLLEGE.[17]

⁂ _The few woodcuts interspersed through the Glossary are not such
faithful representations as the author could have wished. However, they
serve in some measure to explain the various colloquialisms._


A.

_ABROAD_—A boy was said “_to come Abroad_” when he returned to his school
duties after having been “Continent,” (_v. inf._)

_ABS._—Was written after a boy’s name on a Roll, (_v. inf._,) to show
that he was _absent_ from Chapel or Hills, or from any place, where names
had been called.

_AD PORTAS_—A Latin oration addressed by the Præfect of Hall to the
Electors, under Middle gate, at the commencement of Election week.

_AMEN CHAPEL_—A long service performed on the four days set apart for
commemorating the Founder, and on the anniversary of his death.

_APPLE-PIE DAY_—The last Thursday in Short half, on which we had
apple-pies for dinner.


B.

_BAKER_—Anything (such as a cushion or blotting-book) placed on a form to
sit upon.

_BANGIES_—Drab trousers; so called from

_BANGY_—Brown sugar.

_BARTER_—A half-volley (cricket term), so called from the late Warden,
who was celebrated for the vigour with which he disposed of a ball of
this description.

_BATLINGS_—The boys’ weekly allowance of one shilling.

_BEESWAXERS_—Thick laced boots.

_BEEVER-TIME_—A quarter of an hour’s relaxation allowed to the boys in
the middle of afternoon school in summer, to give them an opportunity of
disposing of

_BEEVERS_—A portion of bread and allowance of beer laid out in hall at
the time above mentioned; from the French _boire_, _buveur_.

_BIBLE CLERK_—An office held by the Præfects in full power in rotation;
it lasted for a week. The duties were to collect the Verse and Prose
tasks; to keep order in School; to give in the names of those boys who
were condemned to be “Bibled,” (_v. inf._,) and afterwards assist at
their execution; to take the place of the Præfect of Hall when absent,
&c., &c.

_BIBLER, or BIBLING_—A flogging of six cuts, when the Bible Clerk and
Ostiarius laid bare a hand’s-breadth of the small of the victim’s back.

_BILL BRIGHTERS_—Small faggots used for lighting kitchen fire.

_BLOW_—To blush.

_BLUCHERS_—Præfects not in full power; a metaphor taken from the half
boot.

_BOB_—A large white jug, holding about a gallon.

_BONER_—A blow given with the fist on the lowest vertebra.

_BOOK_—The School was divided into three classes, called Sixth,
Fifth, and Fourth Book. The Præfects formed the former. Fifth Book was
divided into Senior, Middle, and Junior Part. The remaining lower boys
constituted Fourth Book.

_BOOKS, THE_—The prizes given to the two boys at the head of each Part
at the end of each Half; they used at one time to be given by the Duke
of Buckingham, now by Lord Saye and Sele. Also anybody who had got the
largest score on his side in a cricket match, was said “to have got
Books.”

_BOOKS CHAMBERS_—Certain hours on a Remedy, (_v. inf._,) during which the
boys had to attend in School, no Master being present.

_BOOKS, UP TO_—A Part (_v. s._) was said to be so, when it was ranged on
the “Rows” (_v. inf._) before a Master, for the purpose of repeating a
lesson.

_BOOTS AND LEATHERS_—A Commoner Peal, (_v. inf._)

_BREADPICKERS_—A nominal office, one being in the gift of each of the
four senior Commoner Præfects, which excused the holder from fagging.

_BROCK_—To teaze, chaff, or _badger_.

_BROLLY_—An umbrella.

_BRUM_—Without money.

_BULKY_—Generous.


C.

_CANDLEKEEPERS_—The seven Inferiors (_v. inf._) who had been in College
the longest time. They were excused from all fagging, though if there was
an absolute dearth of Juniors, Præfects in full power had (though they
rarely exercised it) the right to fag them. They were allowed a Breakfast
fag in Hall, and a Valet (_v. inf._) in Chambers; and the Senior
Candlekeeper had the power of fagging the twenty Juniors on the School
side of Seventh Chamber Passage Gate.

_CANDLESTICKS_—Candidates for admission into College.

_CARGO_—A hamper of eatables sent to a boy by his friends.

_CAT’S HEAD_—A Dispar, (_v. inf._,) the end of a shoulder of mutton.

_CHAMBER DAY_—A day on which access was allowed to Chambers during the
whole day.

_CHILD_—Each of the Electors appointed one; his principal duty was to
pocket a sovereign.

_CHINTZ_—A chance.

_CLASSICUS_—The boy who at the end of the week has the smallest score in
the

_CLASSICUS PAPER_—The book in which, each day after morning school, the
position of each boy in his Part was marked, the lowest being marked
one, and so on. The Classicus had to get the lessons set, as well as the
Themes for composition.

_CLEAN STRAW_—Clean sheets.

_CLOISTERS_—The name given to Middle and Junior Part of Fifth Book, when
combined together in

_CLOISTER TIME_—Ten or twelve weeks at the latter end of Long Half,
commencing about Whitsunday and ending at Standing-up week, (_v. inf._)

_CLOISTER ROUSH_—An annual engagement between Cloisters and Senior Part
in School at the beginning of Cloister Time.

_CLOW_—A box on the ear.

_COLLEGE WARE_—Crockery that fell without breaking.

_COMMON TIME_—The Short Half, and beginning of Long, up to Easter Time.

_COMMONERS_—The boys not on the foundation. Also the building they lived
in.

_COMMONER GRUB_—An entertainment given by Commoners to College after the
cricket matches.

_COMMONERS SPEAKING_—The day on which the speakers selected from among
the Inferiors declaimed.

_CON_—A blow on the head given with the knuckles or any other hard
substance, derived from κoνδυλον, a knuckle.

[Illustration: CON.]

_CONDUIT_—A water tap.

_CONTINENT_—A boy was said to go _Continent_ when he left School for
Sick-house.

_COURSE, IN_—The two Præfects of Chapel are said “to be in Course” on
alternate weeks, when they have to call names at the end of the service.
The Præfects in each Chamber are “in Course” in rotation, during which
time they are especially responsible for what goes on within their
jurisdiction. A new boy on his arrival was not liable to be fagged for
the first fortnight; when his fagging commenced he was said to be “in
Course.”

_COURSEKEEPER_—An office in the patronage of the Commoner Præfects, the
duties of which were principally connected with the organisation of the
fagging department. He was required to have been three years in the
school, to be of reasonable bodily strength, and in Middle Part. His
privileges were numerous, the principal being that he was allowed to fag.
When he ascended into Senior Part his duties ceased, but his privileges
remained; he was then called “Ex-Coursekeeper.”

_CROCKETTS_—Miniature Cricket, played with a stump and a five’s ball.
Also, when a boy had got no runs in a cricket match, or had failed in a
lesson of Standing Up, (_v. inf._,) he was said to have “got Crocketts.”

_CROPPLED_—To be floored in any examination.

_CUD_—Pretty, Nice.

_CUSE PAPER_—The same as Classicus Paper, (_v. sup._)

_CUT IN A BOOK_—A method of drawing lots. A certain letter was fixed
on, (_e.g._, the first in the second line on the left page,) each boy
then turned over a leaf, and whoever turned over the leaf in which the
corresponding letter was nearest to A, won.


D.

_DEPUTY_—The Junior Candlekeeper, who had the organisation of the Fagging
department, and assisted the Senior Candlekeeper in thrashing the Juniors
in Hall.

_DISPAR_—The rations of meat served out for dinner: derived either from
“Dispertio,” to divide, or “Dispar,” uneven.

_DOCK A BOOK_—To tear out the leaves.

_DOLE_—A stratagem; a clever invention, trick, or dodge.

_DOMUM_—A Latin canticle, supposed to have been written by a boy who was
not allowed to go home for the holidays. The tradition says that he
carved it on a tree, and then committed suicide. On the last Friday in
Long Half, after Election, a kind of festival was held in the evening,
when numbers of people came into College, and “Domum” was sung over and
over again in School, Meads, and the principal Quadrangle. Ten minutes
before the time for descending Hills, the three Juniors in College had to
walk round and across Hills, calling “Domum,” as a signal to the boys to
prepare to start.


E.

_ELECTION_—The examination of Præfects and Senior Part for New College;
and of Candidates for admission to Winchester.

_ELECTORS_—The Warden and two Fellows of New College; and the Warden,
Sub-warden, and Head-master of Winchester, who conducted the examination
above mentioned.

_END_—At dinner-time the Inferiors (_v. inf._) were divided into six
companies, each being presided over by a Candlekeeper. These companies,
and the tables at which they sat, were called “Ends.”

_EX-COURSEKEEPER_—(_V. sup._)

_EX TRUMPS_—Extempore.


F.

_FARDEL_—Sixth Book and Senior Part were divided into three Fardels (or
parts) for the examination in Election week.

_FAT FLAB_—The name of a Dispar; part of the breast of mutton.

_FINJY_—When some one of a number of boys had something unpleasant to do,
he who said “Finjy” last had to do it.

_FLESHY_—The name of a Dispar; a thick cut out of the middle of a
shoulder of mutton.

_FORICUS_—Latrine.

_FOUNDER’S COM_—The four days on which there were festivals in
commemoration of the Founder, when there was Amen Chapel, the Fellows
and Masters gave a dinner in Common-room, and the Founders (_v. inf._)
received a sovereign each.

_FOUNDER’S OB_—The Anniversary of the Founder’s death.

[Illustration: FOUNDERS KIN—(see p. 55.)]

_FOUNDERS_—Boys who proved their descent from the Founder, and were
afterwards elected (by vote among the Electors) as such. Only two were
admitted each year; and only two were sent to New College, but these two
were put at the head of the “Roll,” (_v. inf._,) whatever their previous
position in Sixth Book might have been. They were not obliged to leave at
the age of eighteen, as the other boys were, but were allowed to remain
till they were twenty-five. They were supposed to have particularly thick
skulls.

_FOUR-HOLED MIDDLINGS_—Ordinary walking shoes

_FOURTH BOOK_—All the boys below Junior Part the Fifth.

_FRAGMENT_—A private dinner-party given in Hall to a certain number of
boys, by the Warden, or one of the Masters or Fellows.

_FRATER_—Brother.

_FROUT_—Angry.

_FUNCTIOR_—The rushlight in each chamber.

_FURKED_—To be expelled.


G.

_GAIN A YEAR BY ELECTION_—A boy (not being a Founder) was obliged to
leave at the Election immediately succeeding his eighteenth birthday; he
whose birthday came shortly after Election, was thus enabled to stay till
he was nearly nineteen, and was so said “to gain a year.”

_GAGS_—Slang name for

_GATHERINGS_—Criticisms on some Greek or Latin author, written in Latin
by Sixth Book and Senior Part, eight times in the year. In the other
Parts an analysis of some history, in English, was so called.

_GATER_—A spring head-foremost into “Pot,” (_v. inf._,) over one of the
projecting handles of the canal lock-gate.

_GATES_—When the boys were assembled together in Seventh chamber passage,
preparatory to going on to Hills or Cathedral, they were said “to be at
Gates.”

_GLOPE_—To spit.

[Illustration: GOAL.]

_GOAL_—_1st_, The boy who stood at the centre of each end during a game
of football, and acted as umpire. _2d_, The score made (three) when the
ball was kicked between his legs, or over his head without his touching
it.

_GOMER_—_1st_, A pewter dish; _2d_, A new hat. One of the Commoner Peals
(_v. inf._) was “Gomer Hats.”

_GOWNER_—The Goal (_v. sup._) at football stood with his legs stretched
out, and a gown rolled up in a ball at each foot. When the ball was
kicked over either of these gowns, without Goal’s touching it, this
counted two for the party who kicked it, and was called “a Gowner.”

_GREASER_—A mode of torture performed by rubbing a boy’s head hard with
the knuckles.

_GROTIUS TIME_—From seven P.M. to a quarter before eight on Sundays,
in Cloister time, when Sixth Book and Senior Part went into school to
translate the work of that author.

_GROUND ASH_—A young ash sapling.

_GUTTER_—An abortive attempt at a Header, (_v. inf._,) ending in the
performer falling flat on the water, instead of going in head-foremost.


H.

_HAVES_—Half Boots.

_HERE_—The call used by Commoner Præfects when they required the
attendance of a Junior.

_HIGH-LOWS_—Very thick low shoes, NOT half boots.

_HILLS_—St Catherine’s Hill, a green hill about one mile and a-half from
College, about five hundred feet high, and near the top surrounded by a
deep trench, the remains of an old Roman camp. The boys had to ascend
this twice a day on whole Holidays and Remedies, once before breakfast,
and again at half-past two. In the summer they also went out in the
evening, but did not ascend Hills, but disported themselves below. These
sorties were called “going on to Hills,” the evening expedition being
called “Underhills.”

_HISS, THE_—The signal given at the commencement of school hours when a
Master was coming in.

_HOLLIS_—An oval pebble.

_HOUSLE_—To hustle.

_HOT_—Football term. In Twenty-two and Twenty-two, (_v. inf._,) when the
ball went out of bounds, it was brought in and placed between the two
sides, who all clustered up close round, with their heads down, each
party, by weight and kicking, trying to force the ball through the other.
This _mêlée_ was called a “Hot.”

_HOT END_—A half-burnt faggot stick, with one end red hot.

_HUFF_—Very strong College ale.

_HUSKY_—Gooseberry fool with the husks in.


I.

_INFERIOR_—Any boy not a Præfect.


J.

_JACK_—A large leather vessel for beer.

[Illustration: JACK]

_JORAM_—A tin can for beer used in Commoners.

_JUBILEE_—Any time when there was nothing to do, either in the way of
lessons or fagging.

_JUNKET OVER_—To exult or triumph over another person in a friendly
manner,—_e.g._, “I Junket over you, old fellow; I have leave out
to-morrow.”

_JUNIOR_—All Inferiors except the seven Candlekeepers and Senior
Inferior. The word “Fag” was never used as a substantive except in
combination with another word, as, “Breakfast Fag.” The verb and
participle were in common use.


K.

_KICK IN_—In a game of football the bounds on each side were kept by a
line of Juniors, whose duty it was to kick the ball in again whenever it
passed outside the line.

_KICK OFF_—When the football was taken in hand and then kicked into the
air; which was done after each Schitt, (_v. inf._,) Gowner, (_v. sup._,)
or Goal, by the losing side, and whenever a ball that had been kicked up
in the air had been caught by one of the other side.

_KICK OVER_—To kick a ball up in the air, when it is rolling along, or
lying on the ground. Considered very bad play.

_KID_—Cheese.


L.

_LAUNCH_—To drag a boy out of bed, mattress, bedclothes, and all.

_LOB_—A Tice. It will be observed by cricketers that this is not the
ordinary meaning of the term, which, I believe, generally denotes any
kind of slow, underhand ball. At Winchester a “Lob” may be delivered by a
swift, round-hand bowler.

_LOBSTER_—To Cry.

_LOCKBACK_—A Holiday or Remedy, on which, from bad weather or any other
cause, the boys did not go on to Hills, but remained on the school side
of Seventh Chamber Passage gate.

_LOCKS AND KEYS_—Commoner Peal, (_v. inf._)

_LOGIE_—Sewerage.

_LOG POND_—A Sewer.

_LONG BOX_—A deal box for holding bats, stumps, and balls.

_LONG DISPAR_—Part of a loin of mutton.

_LONG FORK_—A stick used as a toasting-fork.

_LONG GRASS_—All meads except the paths and Turf, (_v. inf._)

_LONG HALF_—The Half which commenced in February, and ended in the middle
of July.

_LONG MEADS_—A field between Sick-house and Commoners, now thrown into
Meads. The time after dinner on summer evenings, when we went on to
Underhills, was also so called.


M.

_MADE BEER_—College swipes bottled with raisins, sugar, nutmeg, and rice,
which made it “up.”

_MAKE_—To appropriate any article.

_MASTER_—The title by which farmers, labourers, bargees, &c., were
addressed by the boys.

_MATER_—Mother.

_MESS_—The Præfects’ tables in Hall were called “Tub, Middle, and Junior
Mess” respectively. The boys who dined at each were also so named. Any
number of boys who habitually breakfasted together were so called, with
some distinguishing prefix, such as “Deputy’s Mess.” In Chambers, tea
was called “Mess;” as was also the remains of a joint of meat. Lest the
reader should make a “Mess” of all these different meanings, I will give
a sentence in which they shall all figure: “Look there, Junior Mess has
sat down at Tub Mess, but as they will find nothing left but a Mess, they
had better go down to Chambers, as Mess is ready.”

_MIDDLE CUT_—A thick slice out of the centre of a leg of mutton.

_MIDDLE PART THE FIFTH_—Generally called Middle Part; the next Part below
Senior Part the Fifth.

_MILK HOLE_—That part of a canal immediately below the lock-gates, where
a hole has been formed by the rush of water from the lock.

_MONEY AND DIRECTION ROLLS_—Commoner Peal, (_v. inf._)

_MOUSE DIGGER_—A miniature pickaxe.

_MUG_—To read hard; also to pay great attention to anything; any one
cleaning and oiling a bat was said to “Mug” it; a boy with carefully
greased and brushed hair was said to have “mugged” hair.

_MUSTARD AND PEPPER KEEPER_—An appointment in the gift of Præfect of
Hall, which exempted the holder from Watching out at Cricket or Kicking
in at Football.

_MUTTONER_—A blow from a cricket-ball on the fingers, the bat being at
the time clasped by them.


N.

_NAIL, TO STAND UP UNDER THE_—The punishment inflicted on a boy detected
in a lie; he was ordered to stand up on Junior Row, (_v. inf._,) just
under the centre sconce, during the whole of school time. At the close of
it he received a “Bibler,” (_v. sup._)

_NESTOR_—Any boy who was past eighteen, or was old for his position in
the school, or who was known to be much older than he looked.

_NIPPERKIN, THE_—A large stone jug for beer, of which there was one in
each Chamber.

_NON HUSKY_—Gooseberry fool without the husks.

_NON LICET_—Used as an adjective, and applied to things which it was
considered improper to use. A gate opening out of Meads was called “Non
Licet Gate,” from a tradition that it was only opened when a boy was
expelled.


O.

_OFF BAT_—The station of one of the field in a cricket match, called by
the outer world “Point.”

_ON_—The word given by the Præfect of Hall for the boys to start to or
from Hills, or to Cathedral. When any person or thing of importance was
known to be likely to meet the boys when on Hills, the word was passed
that he, she, or it was “On,”—_e.g._, “Ridsworth On,” “Snobs On,” “Badger
On,” &c., &c.

_ORDER YOUR NAME_—An order given to a delinquent by the Head or Second
Master, which was carried out by the boy requesting the Ostiarius (_v.
inf._) to do so, the consequence of which was, that at the end of school
that officer presented to the Master the victim’s name on a “Roll,”
(_v. inf._,) who forthwith received a “Scrubbing,” (_v. inf._) When the
words “to the Bible Clerk” were added, the business was confided to that
officer, who, with the Ostiarius, officiated at the subsequent ceremony,
which in this case was called a Bibler, (_v. sup._)

_OSTIARIUS_—An office held by the Præfects in succession. The duties
were, to keep order in school, collect the Vulguses, and prevent the boys
from shirking out. It is also the official title for the Second Master.


P.

_PACKING-UP_—Commoner Peal, (_v. inf._)

_PART_—Fifth Book was divided into Senior, Middle, and Junior “Part.”

_PARTY ROLL_—Commoner Peal, (_v. inf._)

_PATER_—Father.

_PAX_—Be quiet; Leave off. Also, a particular friend.

_PEAL_—Epigrammatic praises or critiques in Latin, Greek, or English,
on the Præfects, chaunted by Cloisters, just before school, at the
commencement of Cloister Time. Also, on the three last Sundays of each
Half, immediately after dinner, Commoners chaunted one of the following
“Peals,” Packing up, “Party Rolls,” and “Money and Direction Rolls.”
They also had other Peals which they emitted prior to the ceremony of
“Sticking up,” (_v. inf._,) which were, “Locks and Keys,” “Boots and
Leathers,” and “Gomer Hats.” The different bells that were chimed for
Chapel were designated “First Peal,” “Second Peal,” &c.

_ΠEMΠE Mῶρον Προτερον_ (“Send the Fool farther”)—An imaginary book, in
search of which a new boy was bandied about from one to another.

_PERCHER_—A mark (⸺|—) put after a boy’s name on a “Roll,” which showed
that he had been absent from Chapel or Hills without leave; or that he
had not done his Verse or Prose Task, or Vulgus. It was also often put
by a Master in the margin of Gags, or a Verse or Prose Task, to indicate
gross errors.

_PITCH UP_—To make a crowd; also to associate with any one in particular.
As a substantive, it means a crowd, a number of things, and a companion.

_PLEDGE YOU_—An expression used when a boy wished to secure the next turn
at anything which was in the use, enjoyment, or occupation of another,
such as the next drink from a bob of beer, the next read of a newspaper,
or the next occupation of a seat.

_PLANT_—To kick a football against a person.

_PLANTER_—A blow from a football.

_PONTO_—A ball made of hot bread kneaded hard.

_POSERS_—Two Fellows of New College who assisted at the examination at
Election.

_POT_—A canal lock; the one just under Hills was generally meant when the
word was used.

_PRÆFECTS_—The eighteen senior boys in College, and the twelve senior
in Commoners. The ten senior of those in College were said to be in
“Full Power,” and took the office of Bible Clerk in rotation; they all
had the power of fagging the Juniors, but those not in full power were
supposed not to have the right of fagging on the School side of Seventh
Chamber Passage; practically, however, they always did. One of the
Senior Præfects was called Præfect of Hall, and was responsible in a
great measure for the conduct of the boys out of school. His duties and
privileges were numerous. There was also a “Præfect of Tub,” who was
supposed to see that the dinner was properly distributed; a Præfect of
School, who had the care of that building; and two Præfects of Chapel,
who, during alternate weeks, called names in Chapel. There were fees
attached to all these offices; and all the Præfects had a certain number
of boys allotted to them as Pupils, each of whom paid one guinea each
Half.

_PROSE_—To lecture. As a substantive, a lecture.

_PROSE TASK_—A piece of Latin prose composition, which all the boys had
to do once a week.

_PRUFF_—Hard, sturdy, insensible to pain, obstinate; a corruption of
“Proof.”

_PULPITEERS_—In Cloister time, Sixth Book and Senior Part went up to
Books together, and were so called.


Q.

_QUARTER OF PAPER_—A quarter of a sheet of foolscap, on which the Prose
and Verse tasks were always written.

_QUILL_—To endeavour to curry favour with any one.


R.

_RABBITER_—A blow on the neck with the side of the hand, similar to the
_coup de grâce_ ordinarily given by a keeper to put a rabbit out of its
misery.

_RACK_—Part of a neck of mutton.

_RAMROD_, _RAYMONDER_—Names given to a ball bowled all along the ground.

_READER_—An office in the gift of every Præfect in senior Fardel, which
excused the recipient from watching out at Cricket. His business was to
read out aloud the translation of any book his Master was cramming for
Election examination.

_READING SHELF_—A shelf with a drawer fixed inside the head of a boy’s
bed, on which to place a candle for nocturnal studies.

_REMEDY_—A kind of mitigated holiday, of which there was always one, and,
generally, two a week. The boys went into school twice in the course
of the day for an hour, (Books Chambers, _v. sup._,) but no Master was
present. A Remedy was not a matter of course, but the Head Master was
always asked by Præfect of Hall to give one while he was walking up and
down “Sands” (the pavement of Quadrangle under Chapel windows) before
morning chapel: if he intended to grant the request, he gave to the
suppliant a ring engraved with the words, “_Commendat rarior usus_.” This
ring he wore till the following day, and returned to the Head Master at
Middle school.

_REMISSION_—When, owing to a Saint’s day having fallen on the day
previous to that on which a Verse or Prose task or Vulgus was due, the
boys were excused from doing it, there was said to be “Remission” from it.

_ROKER_—Anything wherewith to stir up anything else.

_ROLL_—Any list of boys’ names. “The Roll” _par excellence_ is the list
of the boys who have passed their examination for New College, and of
those who are to come in to Winchester. There is also a Roll printed
every November, which contains the name of every one connected with the
School, from the Warden to the Choristers. The lists from which the
Præfects of Hall and Chapel called names; the papers on which the names
of the absentees on such occasions were written; the papers on which were
written the “Standing up” (_v. inf._;) the lists of the boys who had
leave out on a Saint’s day; the papers put on the Master’s desk when boys
wished to go out of school; those handed to the Master at the close of
school by the Bible Clerk or Ostiarius with the names of delinquents, and
many other similar papers, were all called “Rolls.”

_ROUSH_—A rush or charge by any man or beast, or of water.

_ROWS_—The fixed benches at each end of School, called respectively
Senior, Middle, and Junior Row.


S.

_SS. AND TREES_—A scratch game of Football without chosen sides, or
kicking in, so called after the goals, which were, at one end, two iron
clamps fixed in the wall, shaped like the letter S, and at the other two
trees.

_SCADGER_—A Ruffian.

_SCALDINGS_—A call of warning to get out of the way.

_SCHEME_—A method adopted by the boys for calling themselves in the
morning. It was managed by cutting the Functior down to a length
calculated to burn till the time required; paper was then placed round
the socket, and a string attached to it, the other end of which passed
through the head of a bed, and held suspended over the head of the
sleeper a weight of books or cup of water. When the rushlight burned down
it ignited the paper, which burnt the string, and so caused the weight
to fall on the head of the boy beneath.

_SCHITT_—The score made (one) when the Football was kicked between the
goal and the last of the line of the kickers in.

_SCOB_—An oaken box with a double lid. All the College boys and a few
of the Commoner Præfects had one each, at which they sat in School. So
called from the word Box spelt phonetically backwards.

_SCONCE_—To deprive a person of anything.

_SCRAPE OUT_—When a Præfect wished to go out of School, he scraped with
his foot till he got a nod from the Master.

_SCRUBBING_—A flogging of four cuts.

_SCRUTINY_—At the commencement of Election week, the Electors summoned
the seven Senior and seven Junior boys, and inquired of them if they had
any complaints to make with regard to the arrangements made for their
comfort.

_SEMPER_—Always. A very common prefix, _e.g._, a boy was said to be
Semper Continent, Tardy, or ex Trumps if he was often at Sick House, or
late for Chapel, or habitually went up to Books without having looked at
his lessons. An official, who was always present at the College meetings,
went by the name of “Semper Testis.”

_SENIOR PART, THE FIFTH_—The Part next below the Præfects, generally
called Senior Part.

_SHIG_—A Shilling.

_SHORT HALF_—The Half-year commencing in September and ending at
Christmas.

_SILVER FORK_—A wooden skewer used as a chop-stick when forks were scarce.

_SINES_—The loaves provided for breakfast in Commoners, probably derived
from “Sine,” (without,) as the Juniors so often went without them.

_SIX AND SIX_—A game at Football, with six on each side.

_SKIMMER_—A method of entering the water when bathing; by just skimming
beneath the surface, and rising again immediately.

_SKIN_—To take off a Jersey by pulling it inside out over the head.

_SKIRMISHING ON_—Running home from Hills when it came on to rain.

_SNACK_—A small Fives ball.

_SNAPPING UP FOR FALSE QUANTITIES_—When up at books, if any boy, when
translating, made a false quantity, any other boy (however low down in
the part) who could first correct him was allowed to go up above him. If,
however, the Snapper up was himself wrong, he had to go to the bottom of
the part.

_SOCIUS_—A Companion. Each boy was obliged to walk with one when going to
or from Hills or Cathedral.

_SOCK_—To hit hard at Cricket; also, to win; in the passive voice, to be
beaten.

_SOG_—A Sovereign.

_SOROR_—Sister.

_SPITE_—To dislike a person, and treat him accordingly.

_SPITING GABELL_—When a boy suffered some injury himself, in order to
spite another person; or having in some way injured another, received
punishment, he was said to be “Spiting Gabell.” Dr Gabell was formerly
Head Master, and the extreme inexpediency of attempting to annoy him gave
rise to the proverb.

_SPLICE_—To throw.

_SPORT_—To give away; also, to display any article of dress.

_SPREE_—Conceited, Cocky, Giving himself airs; when applied to a person;
Smart, Stylish, when to a thing.

_SQUISH_—Very weak tea.

_STANDING-UP WEEK_—During the last week of Long Half, all the boys,
except Sixth Book and Senior Part, had to say a number of lines by heart
in eight lessons, which they were supposed to have learnt in the course
of the previous year; this was called Standing up. Marks were given
according to merit, and these marks had a very material effect on the
respective position of the boys in their Parts.

[Illustration: STICKING UP.[18]]

_STICKING UP_—On the three last Fridays of each Half, a boy was selected
by appointment of Commoner Præfects and Coursekeeper, and placed on the
top of “Toys” (_v. inf._) in their Hall, and was pelted with “Pontos”
(_v. sup._) by the rest. The following Peals were chanted previously,
one on each day: “Locks and Keys,” “Boots and Leathers,” and “Gomer Hats.”

_STUCKLING_—A kind of mince-pie made of minced beef, caraway seeds, and
apples, always served at the Election dinners.

_SUM_—I am. The answer made by each boy when names were called.

_SUPERANNUATE_—A boy who was obliged to leave at Election, owing to his
being past eighteen years of age. “Founders” were not “Superannuate” till
they were twenty-five.

_SUS_—The Juniors tea generally drunk out of a pint cup when in bed.


T.

_TAG_—A Football term. When a player has kicked the ball well forward,
and has followed it, if it was then kicked back again behind him by the
other side, he was then obliged to return to his original position with
his own side. If the ball had, in the meantime, been again kicked in
front of him, before he regained his position, and he was to kick it, it
would be considered unfair, and he would be said “to Tag.”

_TARDY_—When a boy was too late to answer “Sum,” names being called.

_TEEJAY_—To take an interest in, and protect any one. The boy protected
was called a “Teejay.” Derived from the French, _Protéger_, to protect.

_THICK-_-Stupid; very intimate. Used also as a substantive, thus a Dunce.

_THOKE_—To lie in bed late in the morning. As a substantive, the act of
lying in bed late.

_THOKE UPON ANYTHING_—To dwell with satisfaction on a future pleasure.

_THOKER_—A thick piece of bread dipped in water, and then baked in the
ashes.

_TIN GLOVES_—A new boy was fitted with a pair, by having the backs of his
hands scored backwards and forwards two or three times with a “Hot End”
(_v. sup._) The supposed object of the ceremony was to enable the victim
to handle “Hot Ends” with impunity.

[Illustration: TIN GLOVES.]

_TIZZY_—A Sixpence.

_TIZZY POOLE_—A Fives ball; so called, because they cost sixpence, and
were sold by the Head porter, whose name was Poole.

_TOEFITIE_—To secure the toe of a sleeper in a noose of string.

[Illustration: TOEFITIE.]

_TOE PAN_—A large basin of red earthenware placed in each chamber, for
washing the feet in.

_TOE PAN BOILER_—A tin vessel for boiling water, containing about three
gallons.

_TOLLY_—A tallow candle.

_TOTHER_ SCHOOL—Any school not a public school.

_TOYS_—Bureaux in Chambers and Commoner’s Hall. Each boy had one, at
which he sat during

_TOY TIME_—The period between dinner time and evening Chapel.

_TUB_—A chest in Hall, into which the Dispars not taken by the boys were
put.

_TUB MESS_—The table at which the Senior Præfects sat in Hall.

_TU DOCES_—A (Thou) Teachest.

_TUG_—Old, Stale.

_TUGS_—Stale News. A common remark when a boy related anything known
previously to the hearer.

_TUNDING_—A thrashing with a ground-ash inflicted by a Præfect. When any
grave offence had been committed, and it was administered by Præfect of
Hall on the raised dais at one end of Hall, it was called a “Tunding on
top of Hall.”

_TURF_—A part of Meads, almost exclusively kept for Præfects to play
Cricket on, and for the matches.

_TWENTY-TWO AND TWENTY-TWO_—A game at Football, with Twenty-two on each
side.

_TWOSTER_—A stick spirally indented by a stem of ivy having grown round
it.


V.

_VALET_—Every Præfect had a Junior in Chambers who acted in this
capacity, made his tea or coffee, carried his things through from
Chambers to School and back again, and looked after him in general.

_VARYING_—A short extempore composition in Latin verse, done without the
aid of any books. It was always the last thing done at the close of the
Election examination.

_VERSE TASK_—A composition of Latin verse done once a week by all the
boys.

_VESSEL OF PAPER_—Half-a-quarter of a sheet of foolscap paper.

_VOLUNTARY_—A copy of verses written occasionally by some of the boys in
Sixth Book and Senior Part _ex proprio motu_.


W.

_WARDEN’S PROG_, (_Progress_)—The visitation of the College estates by
the Warden and Fellows.

_WASHING DRAWER_—An oaken dressing-case.

_WASHING STOOL_—The table at which each Præfect sat in Chambers.

[Illustration: WASHING STOOL.]

_WATCHING OUT_—Fielding at Cricket. When a Junior made a catch, he was
let off for the rest of the day.

_WORSTEDERS_—Very thick worsted stockings, worn at Football.


Y.

_YOLLY_—Yellow; also, a Postchaise, from that being their usual colour.

[Illustration: YOLLY.]




FOOTNOTES


[1] Three masters’ houses, for the reception of boys, have recently been
opened outside the college walls.

[2] Since the above was written, I have been shown a little book,
entitled “Ups and Downs of a Public School,” in which many of the
incidents alluded to by me are very graphically described, especially
“the play,” “the town and gown row,” and “the examination in election
week.”

[3] This word being hitherto unwritten, I have endeavoured,
unsuccessfully, to spell phonetically. It is derived from the French
_proteger_, and the last syllable is pronounced as in that word. Its
meaning is somewhat the same as that of the French word, but implies
rather a greater amount of care and interest.

[4] The beds in Seventh were different from those described in Fourth,
being made of iron, without any canopy, with deal boards at the side to
keep the mattresses in their places.

[5] See “Ups and Downs of a Public School.”

[6] On Sundays the boys went to Cathedral, instead of Chapel, at
half-past ten A.M.

[7] This refined method of tossing up was arranged as follows:—A certain
letter (say the first of the third line) was fixed on, and each boy
turned over a page in succession; he who turned over that one in which
the corresponding letter was nearest to A, won; and _vice versâ_.

[8] See “Ups and Downs of a Public School.”

[9] See the full-page illustration of a “Hot,” drawn by Mr R. Holmes.

[10] I believe the word “continent” is derived from the Latin _contineo_,
to keep in.

[11] See “Ups and Downs of a Public School.”

[12] This must not be confounded with the _Roll_ which was published
every November, giving a list of the entire establishment of the College,
commencing with the Warden, Head master, (Informator,) Second master,
(Hostiarius,) the ten fellows, three chaplains, the under masters, the
seventy scholars, the commoners, and the choristers.

[13] I very much wish that when the Chambers were changed and refurnished
the curious old bedsteads had not been done away with: they were unique,
and very comfortable.

[14] Bishop Shuttleworth, when he heard of this change, observed, “Diruit
ædificat, mutat quadrata rotundis.”

[15] The examination for the Oxford scholarships takes place in December.

[16] There is one change of nomenclature made by the boys themselves (I
suppose) that seems to me to be somewhat ridiculous. They speak of each
other as “men;” surely “fellows” (the term used formerly) would be more
appropriate.

[17] As the editor of the above Glossary has never seen any of the
expressions written or in print, he has no rule to go by with respect
to their orthography. He has, however, endeavoured to spell them as
phonetically as the nature of our alphabet will allow. All slang words
that are in common use elsewhere, and all names of persons and places,
have been omitted. Compound words, such as “Long Fork,” “Chamber day,”
&c., he has only put down under the initial letter of the first word. He
has also omitted substantives formed from verbs by adding “ster,” such
as “Brockster,” a person given to chaffing, from “to Brock;” “Mugster,”
from “to Mug,” &c., &c. Many of the words are doubtless now obsolete, and
it is probable that Wykehamists of older standing than the editor will
miss several that they used to be familiar with; but, on the whole, it is
believed this Glossary will be found pretty nearly correct for the period
of from 1834-40.

[18] The picture is somewhat incorrect. Three or four bureaus, each
about eight feet six inches high, stood against the wall, and the boys
in ordinary jackets and waistcoats (not in tight jackets) threw at the
victim from the front.

                             BALLANTYNE PRESS
                  PRINTED BY BALLANTYNE, HANSON AND CO.
                           EDINBURGH AND LONDON
